The proof that the fight between Alex Beigelman and UBS had descended into absurdity was the dispute over the granola bar. It was the fifth day of arbitration hearings, and a lawyer for UBS, the financial conglomerate where Beigelman had worked, seemed to be having some windpipe trouble. “I tried to eat a Kind bar really quickly,” the bank lawyer said. “And I have all of that granola crunchy stuff stuck in my throat.”

“TMI,” answered Linda Friedman, the civil rights attorney who was representing Beigelman.

“I’m sorry, Linda, if you think that’s too much information,” the bank lawyer replied.

In front of the three arbitrators who would decide the case, Friedman challenged the opposing counsel’s familiarity with snack food. “It’s not,” she said, “a Kind bar.”

Beigelman was watching it all with a mix of bewilderment and fury. For three years he’d been scuffling with UBS Group AG, based in Zurich, over $1 million in pay he thought he was owed. In 2015 the bank let him go right before his bonus was due. He hired a lawyer and fought back. But because Beigelman had signed an arbitration agreement when he started his job, he was ushered into an enigmatic system of corporate justice where proceedings are secretive and the odds of workers winning are long. Beigelman’s hearings were held in a Lower Manhattan conference room during four days in October 2017. There was a five-month recess, and now, the following March, it seemed to be reaching a Kafkaesque, possibly even Dantesque, conclusion.

Expert assassin Henry Brogan (Will Smith) is hiding out in a field as he awaits his target, suspected terrorist Valery Dormov (Igor Szasz), to pass by on a moving train. Just as Henry gets ready, his spotter and fellow DIA agent, Marino (EJ Bonilla), informs him that there is a little girl standing in front of Dormov. They must wait until she is out of sight, allowing Henry to take the shot. He just manages to strike Dormov in the neck, but he still kills him. Marino later shows Henry a video of civilians’ reactions to Dormov’s killing on the train. He orders Marino to delete it, as he wants no memory or image of that in his head.

Henry decides to retire from the assassin life and is later visited by his handler, Del Patterson (Ralph Brown). Henry expresses his remorse over all the lives he has taken over his career, and how one wrong move could have ended that little girl’s life.

Henry goes to rent a boat, meeting the shop’s new manager Dani Zakarweski (Mary Elizabeth Winstead) before going to meet his friend Jack Willis (Douglas Hodge). He tells Henry that Dormov was actually an innocent man working as a molecular biologist who worked in the States for 30 years. Jack thinks Henry’s file on Dormov was spiked. When Henry asks where he is getting this information, Jack tells him it’s his informant in Budapest, Yuri Kovacs (Ilia Volok), and he passes on this information. This whole encounter is bugged and listened in on by DIA director Janet Lassiter (Linda Emond) and GEMINI director Clay Varris (Clive Owen). Clay orders Lassiter to find a way to take care of Henry.


Henry goes back to the shop and suspects Dani of working with the DIA and is following him. She denies it, and Henry feels like a jerk, so he invites her out for dinner. During their outing, it is confirmed that Dani is DIA, but she says she was following in her FBI father’s footsteps. Henry also mentions his retirement and why he is choosing to leave this life behind.

Later that night, a team of insurgents sneak onto Jack’s boat to kill him and his girlfriend, and then dump their bodies in the water. Soon after, Henry wakes up at home and realizes men are breaking in. He calls Marino to warn him, but he hears him get killed over the phone. Henry has no choice but to run. He kills the intruders and then goes to Dani’s house to warn her. He figures that since she doesn’t seem to know about it that she must not be in on it, and she may be the next target. When Dani is left alone for a moment, she is attacked by a mercenary, but she gets the upper hand on him and beats the information out of him (along with some teeth). Dani confirms to Henry that Lassiter sent them.

Henry and Dani ride a boat out somewhere obscure until they are found by Henry’s pilot friend Baron (Benedict Wong). Henry contacts Del just to figure out what is going on. He tells him about GEMINI working with the DIA to wipe out their agents. It turns out that Dormov was working with GEMINI, and Henry figures out Clay’s involvement. Henry asks Dani what she knows about GEMINI, which is just a paramilitary organization run by Clay, who originally wanted Henry and Baron to join him since they knew him as a marine, but they both declined. GEMINI specializes in wiping out specific targets with the utmost discretion.

The trio go to Cartagena temporarily. In their hotel room, Henry spots a shooter running across the adjacent rooftops. Henry runs out and starts shooting at the man. He quickly discovers that the shooter looks exactly like him, and he is named “Junior”. He utilizes the exact same skill set as Henry, which makes him hard to strike. Junior chases Henry as they both ride motorbikes, resulting in Junior trying to hit Henry with his flaming bike before it explodes. Before Junior can kill Henry, authorities arrive, and he flees. Baron and Dani “take” Henry into custody as they head somewhere safer. Henry figures out their next move is to go to Budapest to meet Yuri to get more information from him. Baron finds someone who loans him a plane to get them there.