The film opens in the Cenozoic Era on Earth. A great battle has just taken place. The Yellow Ranger is crawling to safety and de-morphs before she dies. The Red Ranger, Zordon (Bryan Cranston), is the sole survivor of his team. The Green Ranger, Rita Repulsa (Elizabeth Banks), is seeking out the Zeo Crystal to have dominion over the world. Rita offers Zordon a chance to join her, but he refuses. A huge blast then goes off, sending Rita into the ocean along with her power coin.

It's the present day in a town called Angel Grove. Star football player Jason Scott (Dacre Montgomery) and his buddy are sneaking a cow into the locker room of another school as a prank. The police then arrive on the scene, forcing the guys to flee. Jason drives away recklessly and ends up getting into a pretty bad car accident as his car flips over.

Several weeks later, Jason is forced to attend weekend detention classes for the rest of the school year, and he must also be under house arrest. His father Sam (David Denman) is disappointed in how Jason threw his prospects away and that he has to spend time with other degenerates. When he gets there, he sees Billy Cranston (RJ Cyler) organizing his pencils by color. A bully (Wesley MacInnes) comes over and starts messing with Billy by breaking one of his pencils and calling him a freak. Jason steps in and defends Billy. The bully tries to swing at Jason but he gets smacked hard across the face before being told to not bother either of them again.

Kimberly Hart (Naomi Scott) leaves the room before their session begins. She goes to the bathroom and meets up with two of her old friends, Amanda (Sarah Grey) and Harper (Morgan Taylor Campbell). They have decided to kick Kimberly off the cheer squad, and out of their own lives completely. Harper spitefully cuts Kimberly out of a picture of them before leaving. Kimberly takes the scissors and starts to cut her own hair.

After the session is done, Billy catches up with Jason and thanks him for defending him against the bully. He invites Jason to hang out, but Jason shows him the tag on his leg. Billy offers to take it off if he goes to his house. Jason instead goes home, but after hearing his parents arguing about him, he rides his bike to Billy's house. With four minutes left, Billy calmly and carefully removes the tag. He then asks Jason for a favor for himself.

The guys go by a hill where they carry a big crate of equipment that Billy wants to use in a specific location. Jason isn't comfortable with the task and he leaves. He runs into Kimberly, who is swimming in the lake. Meanwhile, another Angel Grove student, Zack Taylor (Ludi Lin), is watching the new girl, Trini (Becky G), doing yoga nearby

Jason and Kimberly talk about the prospect of running away and starting new lives. Billy works on his experiment and causes an explosion on the side of the hill. Everyone runs to the scene. Zack and Trini meet the other three kids. On the wall are what appear to be different colored gems. Zack breaks them off. They are actually power coins with the colors red, blue, black, yellow, and pink. When they hear alarms going off, the kids run for it. Jason and Billy take Billy's mom's van before going back to get the other three. Their path is headed in the same direction as an oncoming train. Billy thinks he can make it before the train comes, but the train slams right into the van. The van crashes, and the coins start glowing.

Somewhere over the ocean, Sam, who works as a fisherman, has his men pull up a big pile of fish as a storm starts hitting. He discovers Rita's corpse among the fish.

The kids all wake up in their rooms, miraculously unharmed and with enhanced strength (Jason breaks off a piece of his sink and Kimberly crushes her phone in her hand). They still have their power coins on them. At school, the bully goes up to Billy and tries to break his wrist, but Billy's bones don't budge. The bully then headbutts Billy, only to get knocked unconscious and have all the kids think Billy did it on his own. He meets up with Jason and Kimberly, who decide that they should go back to the hill to investigate what is happening to them.
