The film opens in New York City, where a little dog named Max (Louis CK) is going for a bike ride around the park with his owner Katie (Ellie Kemper). Max tells us how Katie found him when he was a puppy, and since then, he's had it good.
After Katie leaves for work, Max just sits at the door and waits for her to come home. We meet the other pets that live near Max, including Gidget (Jenny Slate), Chloe (Lake Bell), Mel (Bobby Moynihan), Buddy (Hannibal Buress), and Sweet Pea (Tara Strong). Gidget has a crush on Max, which he is unaware of. Chloe is a fat cat that eats her owner's food instead of her own. Sweet Pea is a little bird that turns on the fan and pretends to fly with jets on TV. We also see Leonard the poodle being left with classic music, but he switches it to a System of a Down song when his owner leaves. Max is visited by Chloe, Buddy, and Mel, along with a lost guinea pig named Norman (Chris Renaud).

That night, to Max's horror, Katie brings home a bigger dog named Duke (Eric Stonestreet). Max quickly makes it clear to both Duke and Katie how he feels about Duke being there, but Katie hopes it'll work out between the two of them. Duke overhears Max barking to Katie after Duke tries to sleep in the same bed as Max. Hurt, Duke says he'll do whatever it takes to ensure he stays in this home. He forces Max to sleep on the floor.

The next morning, the dogs are left alone after Katie goes to work. Duke eats food from both his bowl and Max's. Duke then runs toward the wall and knocks over a vase. Max takes the opportunity to make a big mess and have Duke blamed for it so Katie can get rid of him.

Max and Duke get taken out by a dog walker along with Mel and Buddy. When they are unleashed at the park, Duke calls Max over to a hidden area and then drags him away from the park with no one noticing. They end up in an alley where dozens of cats led by the hairless Ozone (Steve Coogan) antagonize them. They take the dogs' collars from them. Duke runs away and leaves Max behind, only to come back when animal control officers chase after them. Max and Duke get captured.

Gidget peeks out her window and sees Mel and Buddy, but no Max. She watches a Spanish soap opera and is inspired to go after her one true love. She runs to the rooftop and finds a hawk named Tiberius (Albert Brooks) in his coop. He tries to eat Gidget at first, but then realizes that's a bad thing. She asks for his help in finding Max so that she can be his best friend. Tiberius flies away immediately.

Emerging from the sewers is an adorable bunny named Snowball (Kevin Hart). The animal control officers stop the truck, and one walks over to him. Snowball goes wild and beats the man up while his two lackeys, a lizard and a tattooed pig named...Tattoo (Michael Beattie), attack the other officer. They hijack the truck and ride away. Snowball makes a key out of a carrot and breaks out one dog named Ripper. The truck crashes against a wall. The animals are about to leave Max and Duke behind until they beg to be saved. Snowball says they are part of the Flushed Pets, as they were abandoned by their owners, and he won't save Max and Duke because he knows they're domesticated. The dogs lie about killing their owner to get on Snowball's good side, and he frees them before the truck explodes. Max and Duke follow him into the sewer.