We performed at pretty much every big music festival in North America and Europe. The high point was the Reading Festival in the UK. We played the main stage in front of a hundred thousand people. We sounded great and a lot of our hardcore fans were mouthing my words. I was always amazed when we’d run into people who barely spoke English but knew every lyric from our songs.

Gotham City, 1981 – Arthur Fleck (Joaquin Phoenix) works as a clown-for-hire for a company called Ha-Ha’s. He is tasked with advertising a store by dancing and waving a sign around. The sign gets snatched by a group of punk teens, forcing Arthur to chase them into an alley. They smash the sign against his face and proceed to mercilessly kick him while he’s down.

In this era, Gotham is struggling with crime, unemployment, and poverty. Arthur visits a social worker for his medication, as well as his ongoing mental health issues. On the bus ride home, a small child looks at Arthur. He makes silly faces that amuse the boy, but his mother tells Arthur to leave him alone. Arthur begins to laugh hysterically, and when the mother questions him, he hands her a card that explains that he has a condition that causes him to laugh the way that he does.

Arthur returns home where he lives with his ailing mother, Penny (Frances Conroy). They sit and watch a talk show with host Murray Franklin (Robert DeNiro). Arthur imagines himself being on the show and getting Murray’s attention. In his fantasy, Arthur charms the audience and Murray by telling them that he takes care of his mother. Penny used to work for Thomas Wayne (Brett Cullen) and has written to him to try and better their living situation.


At Ha-Ha’s, Arthur is given a gun for protection by his coworker Randall (Glenn Fleschler) after he hears about the mugging incident.

Arthur is infatuated with his neighbor, single mother Sophie Dumond (Zazie Beetz). She speaks to him politely, but he is awkward and weird around her. At one point, he spends his day following her. Later, she comes by his apartment and asks if he was following her, and he admits that he was, but she doesn’t seem put off by it. He invites her to a stand-up comedy show that he is performing at.

Arthur goes to the comedy club for his performance. He starts off by laughing uncontrollably before going off into his routine, which isn’t very funny. Sophie appears to be in the audience, laughing at Arthur’s jokes.

Arthur later goes to a childrens hospital to entertain them as a clown. He brought his gun with him, and it falls out on the floor. Arthur’s boss later chews him out for this, as well as for losing the sign from the store where he got mugged. To top things off, Randall claims that Arthur got the gun himself. Arthur gets fired, and he leaves Ha-Ha’s after calling Randall out on giving him the gun. Arthur’s week only gets worse when he is told by his social worker that the city is cutting off funding and shutting down that facility, meaning Arthur has nowhere else to get his meds.

After our last show, Warren left early with his family. I don’t know where Census disappeared to. But Carrie and I went out on the town with some superfans and did Karaoke with them. Yes, we were all very inebriated. I rapped “Bombs Over Baghdad” while Carrie did the backbeat woofing. One of the fans, a dark-haired, green-eyed beauty from Helsinki, was on my arm. She was willing to go wherever I wanted. But Carrie was there, looking so goddessesque. I still think about the tank she wore that night, the camo shorts, the shin-high Doc Martens. I remember how she looked at me when she saw the Finnish girl on my arm. For once she was looking at me like I looked at her. The Finnish girl, even as drunk as she was, could see it.