Reese and Sarah run through an alley behind the club as the killer chases them. From the killer's perspective we see that he is a robot of some kind who sees them through a computerized form of night vision. Reese blasts the gas tank of a nearby car which explodes. The killer is unfazed, and jumps on the hood of Reese's car, smashing its fist through the windshield and grasping at Sarah. Reese maneuvers his car in reverse and throws the killer off. Reese speeds off while the Terminator subdues a cop (screenwriter William Wisher) and takes his squad car. During the chase, the killer listens closely to the police reports on the car's radio and responds in the cop's voice.

During the chase, Reese frantically identifies himself as a sergeant with a serial number and explains that Sarah has "been targeted for termination" and that the killer chasing them is not a man but a machine called a "terminator"; a metallic combat chassis covered with living human tissue to make it appear human. They race through several alleys, finally stopping in a parking garage. Reese tells Sarah that the first and larger 600 Series Terminators had rubber skin, but the newer 800 Series are very hard to identify which is why he followed Sarah and waited for the Terminator to make its move so he could identify it. Incredulous, Sarah panics and begins to scream for help, biting Reese on the hand. He tells her not to do it again.

In the parking garage, they leave behind Reese's car and find another unlocked one. Reese explains further that a nuclear war will be initiated by a new, powerful computer system (referred to as "Skynet" in the first sequel) that is going to be tasked with controlling all defense systems. Reese himself has not seen the ensuing nuclear holocaust but was born and grew up destitute and starving in the ruins. He was enslaved and marked with a barcode and was forced to work loading bodies into incinerators. The human race, he says, will be on the verge of extinction when one man, John Conner, is able to organize the remaining humans into an effective resistance movement that, by the time Reese will be sent back to the present day by Connor himself, had actually defeated Skynet. John Conner is Sarah's future son.

In desperation, Skynet has sent the Terminator to the present day to murder Sarah and eliminate John Connor's existence. Reese also explains that the Terminator pursuing Sarah, is a new model, one that appears infinitely more human than its predecessors. Reese tells her the android will bleed, sweat and even has bad breath to enhance the disguise. Reese is uncertain that he can defeat the android without having the advanced weaponry of the future.