Back in the Shadow Gallery, after a play bout with a suit of armor, V invites Evey to watch The Count of Monte Cristo (1934) with him, a film about love and revenge. After the film, Evey catches a glimpse of the news where the death of Prothero is announced. Suspicious, Evey questions V who admits that he killed Prothero and plans to kill others for justice, though Evey doesn't understand his motives. Shaken by this, she resolves to escape V's lair. To do so, she offers her assistance and some back story to her life. She explains that her parents both protested the government following the death of her little brother due to a deadly virus leak at his school. She was young but remembers the riots and protests and how her parents were taken from her in the middle of the night, black bags forced over their heads. She was sent to a juvenile detention center but never forgot the lessons her parents taught her. Inspired by this, V agrees to let her help and comes up with a plan for his next victim.

Bishop Anthony Lilliman (John Standing) walks through his church and is met by a page who tells him his latest 'guest' has arrived but is older than expected. Lilliman walks to his room where Evey, dressed as a young girl, is waiting for him. While V scales the rooftops, Evey attempts to warn Lilliman of the danger he's in, but the bishop thinks that her story is part of an act and tries to have sex with her, forcing her down on the bed. She manages to kick him off her, resulting in a slew of un-priestly curses from him, before V enters the room. Evey apologizes and runs off before V assaults Lilliman, promising no mercy. A nearby surveillance van picks up the audio conversation between Lilliman and V and calls dispatch. Finch arrives shortly to find Lilliman dead, also having vomited and with a rose on his body, before Creedy arrives with his own special force. He puts Finch under surveillance, claiming that the extra precautions are needed since a couple of respected party members have been slain and argues that Finch put a hold on his investigations surrounding the terrorist's link with the victims.

Evey finds sanctuary with her boss, Gordon Deitritch (Stephen Fry), whom she had been going to see the night she met V. He allows her to stay with him and, as a sign of trust, shows her a hidden room behind his wine cabinet. There, he reveals a copy of the Koran amid photographs of homoerotic scenes with muscular men. He admits to being, like her, a fugitive and explains that he hides his true self in plain sight on television and by entertaining young women like Evey within the privacy of his home. The next morning, he coincidentally makes Evey the same breakfast V served her while she was in the Shadow Gallery. Gordon finds the coincidence funny and quips that only the things that matter most should be considered with such humor.

Finch continues his investigation unabated with Dominic and focuses his attention on Larkhill, the records of which prove to be stubborn in revealing much information. He does find that Lilliman was also stationed there as a priest for enemies of the state that were confined there. Out of the list of high ranking officials left alive, Finch finds just one; a woman who worked as a chemist, although her name is unavailable. He then goes to see a coroner named Delia Surridge (Sinéad Cusack) and presents her with the flower that he found on Lilliman. Delia recognizes the flower as a scarlet carson, thought to be extinct, but admits that she can't offer any other information. When Finch returns to headquarters, Dominic informs him that he's found out who the mystery woman is; Delia. Shocked, having just seen her, Finch leaves, hoping he's not too late.

Delia wakes in her bed and speaks to the shadows in her room, asking if he's come to kill her. V appears and responds yes, to Delia's relief. She converses with V, admitting fault in what happened to him but defending her intentions, which were for the best. Though V tells her he cannot allow her to live, he reveals to have given her a quick injection while she slept, providing an easy and painless death. Delia apologizes and succumbs peacefully moments before Finch arrives to find her in bed with a scarlet carson in her hand and a small red notebook on her bedside table.

Finch presents the notebook to Sutler who dismisses the contents as either propaganda written by the terrorist or the ravings of a delusional ex-party member. Sutler advises Finch to forget about the journal, but Finch can't help but recall what he read. The notebook was a diary of Delia's and chronicled her start at Larkhill 20 years prior as a medicinal chemist. She writes how she tested virulent drugs on vagrants and deviants of society who she found herself despising because of their pathetic disposition. She mentioned working alongside both Prothero and Lilliman. All tests on subjects proved fatal except in the case of one man who resided in room five. In his case, though he had a near complete loss of memory, he developed quick reflexes and strength. On November fifth, the laboratory where she worked exploded violently and, as she escaped the compound, saw the man from room five, horribly burnt and roaring in anger.

Evey, meanwhile, shares an evening with Gordon as he shows her the premiere of a new show he wrote that morning and uncensored by the department. She gulps her champagne as she watches Gordon welcome Chancellor Sutler (an actor impersonator, as the real Sutler watches from his own home) to his studio while armed soldiers hold shotguns towards the audience, prompting them to applaud. Sutler is offered a glass of warm milk in reference to the real Sutler's habit of drinking one every night (we see this is indeed true). A hilarious skit ensues as an actor dressed as V ties Sutler's shoelaces together while he calmly assures everyone that the terrorist has been neutralized. Upon discovering V trying to blend in the studio band, Sutler stumbles on his feet and a comedic chase progresses across the stage to the sound of Yakety Sax. Finally, Sutler grabs hold of V and removes his mask to reveal another Sutler copy who says that he's the real one. They both order the soldiers to open fire and are shot down while the audience laughs and the real Sutler breaks his glass in fury.

While Evey is worried that Gordon will face severe repercussions, he is optimistic and tells her not to fret. However, that night, Evey awakes to glass breaking as Gordon rushes into her room, telling her to hide. She gets under her bed (mirroring the scenario when her parents were taken from her) as the bedroom door is broken down. Creedy enters with soldiers and they beat and restrain Gordon, placing a black bag over his head and taking him away. Evey manages to climb out the window down to the back yard, but she is apprehended and black-bagged just before she can escape. When the bag is removed, she finds herself in an interrogation room with a government official hidden in darkness asking her about the location of the terrorist. When she is unable to answer, she is 'processed'. Her head is shaven and she is tortured and given rotten food while kept in a small cell. One day, she hears a rustle from inside one of the side walls and discovers a small note written on toilet paper. She uses the light coming from under the door to read the note from a woman named Valerie who tells a brief story of her life and how she wound up confined. Valerie (young - Imogen Poots older - Natasha Wightman) describes how she first fell in love with a girl in her class named Sarah (Laura Greenwood) and when she was disowned by her parents for being a lesbian. She met the love of her life, Ruth (Mary Stockley), while acting in a film and they moved to London together as America's war worsened and the government began to change. Fear and persecution against anyone unworthy in Sutler's mind, including homosexuals and Muslims, led to their detainment. Ruth was taken away shortly before Valerie was. She ends her note by offering some solace in the fact that, while her life may be taken, she will still retain her integrity as a human being and tells the reader that, though she does not know them, she loves them.

Tearfully inspired, Evey is once again brought to the interrogation room where she refuses to cooperate, despite threats of death. She is returned to her cell to await execution. An official arrives and asks Evey to give just one bit of information to save her life, but Evey says she'd rather die. The man then tells her that she now has no fear and is completely free before leaving. Confused, Evey gets to her feet and walks out the open door. She goes down a corridor and turns a corner to see that she is in none other than the Shadow Gallery. V appears before her and explains that he was the one to bring her here and that Gordon was unfortunately executed once the police found the hidden room behind the wine cabinet. V tells her that, while her imprisonment was a farce, it was to bring out in Evey what V experienced; to allow her to let go of fear and hate and realize that there's something more important than even her life. Evey angrily retorts, claiming the inability to feel anything anymore and collapses to the ground, short of breath. V catches her and comforts her, asking her to remember the atrocities committed against her and her family and recall what she felt when she said she'd rather die than give in. But Evey begs to be let outside, feeling faint. V takes her to the roof where it is raining. Before he can cover her with a blanket, Evey steps out into the rain and raises her arms, laughing in a moment of pure release, just as V once did.

Back in the Gallery, Evey tells V that she can no longer stay with him and, now that she fears nothing, will return to the outside world to take her chances. She motions to give V the note she found, thinking he wrote it, but he shows her a shrine surrounded by scarlet carsons with Valerie's photo above it. He tells Evey that the note was delivered to him as it was to her and that Valerie died in Larkhill where he was also kept. He maintains his vindication that what was done to him must be repaid. Evey approaches V and thanks him before agreeing to his request to visit one last time before the fifth. She then leaves. V returns to his room and removes his mask, throwing it against the vanity mirror and breaking down in tears.