Scenes described in red text appear only in the Special Edition.

The movie opens with shots of traffic and children in playgrounds. The sounds of children's voices die out, followed by a flash-forward to Los Angeles in 2029 AD. The world has become a wasteland of wrecked cars, destroyed buildings, and black-charred playgrounds filled with skeletons and skulls. The voice of Sarah Connor (Linda Hamilton) narrates: "3 billion human lives ended on August 29th, 1997. The survivors of the nuclear fire called the war Judgment Day. They only lived to face a new nightmare: the war against the machines."

The foot of a metallic android smashes a skull on the ground. A battle starts between human guerrilla troops and a technically far superior robotic army. Crushing skulls beneath their tracks, robotic tanks open a full-frontal assault on the humans, who are trained to make use of what shelter the ruined terrain offers them. Flying aircraft search the ground for targets as T-800 androids sweep the terrain at places the tanks cannot access. Although they suffer heavy losses, the humans manage to destroy several tanks, aircraft and androids. They even use old cars as crude assault vehicles, but the machines' laser cannons are accurate and unrelenting.

John Connor is saluted by his soldiers as he walks through a crumbling hallway and inspects the battlefield from a safe distance. The camera zooms in on his scarred face as Sarah's voice-over continues: "Skynet, the computer that controlled the machines, sent two terminators back through time. Their mission: to destroy the leader of the human resistance: John Connor, my son. The first Terminator was programmed to strike at me in the year 1984, before John was born. It failed. The second was set to strike at John himself when he was just a child. As before, the Resistance was able to send a lone warrior, a protector for John. It was just a question of which one of them would reach him first."

The opening credits play in a montage of shots of playgrounds burning in an inferno. The credits end as the camera zooms in on the metal face of a Terminator, through the fire, until its red glowing eyes are in extreme close-up, accompanied by the thematic five rapid drumbeats.

The action changes to a truck stop in the middle of the night. The wind scatters trash strewn around several trucks parked in the lot. Electric charges fill the air, jumping among several trucks. Out of nowhere, a brightly-lit orb appears, vaporizing a bowl in the ground and a section of a nearby truck. A large flash of light comes from the orb and it disappears, leaving a naked man crouching in its place. As the electrical charges slowly fade, the Terminator (Arnold Schwarzenegger) rises to its feet. It has the same appearance as the one sent through time in The Terminator (1984) to kill Sarah Connor. We see its red point-of-view processing screen as it approaches the Corral, a biker bar across the street from the truck stop, inspects the vehicles, mostly motorcycles, parked outside and enters.

The bikers inside watch with a mixture of astonishment and amusement as the naked Terminator calmly walks among them, inspecting every male customer on the way. It even attracts a couple of looks from one of the waitresses. It stops in front of a cigar-smoking biker as it determines that the man's clothes are a match to its body size. The Terminator calmly tells him that it needs his "clothes, boots, and motorcycle", causing much hilarity among the other customers. The cigar man tells it that it "forgot to say please" and blows smoke in the Terminator's face. He puts out his cigar on Terminator's bare chest, only to be surprised that the pain doesn't seem to bother it. The Terminator grabs the man's hand and twists his arm. As the biker screams, another biker hits the Terminator in the head with a pool cue; he's hurled through the window for his trouble. The cigar biker is thrown into the kitchen and lands on the hot stove, burning his hands. A third tough biker pulls a knife on the Terminator. He stabs it with no effect and is quickly disarmed and pinned to the pool table with his own knife. The rest of the customers scramble away. The Terminator enters the kitchen, approaching the wounded cigar biker. The frightened biker grabs a pistol and tries to rack the slide but the Terminator grabs the pistol from him. Terrified, he quickly tosses his keys to the Terminator.

As George Thorogood's "Bad to the Bone" plays, the Terminator steps outside, fully dressed, and mounts one of the motorcycles, a large Harley-Davidson. Before it can ride off, the barkeeper comes out with a lever-action shotgun and fires a warning shot, threatening to kill it if it doesn't step off the bike. The Terminator gets off, calmly walks towards the man, and with a quick move, it relieves the barkeeper of his shotgun and sunglasses before riding off.

In the city of Los Angeles, a police officer in a trash-strewn vacant lot underneath a bridge calls in a strange electrical disturbance to headquarters. As he inspects the area and notices a strange round hole burned into a chain link fence, he is approached from behind by a naked T-1000 (Robert Patrick), also a cyborg, less bulky than the Terminator. The T-1000 instantly kills the officer with a quick stab to the gut. The terminator picks up the cop's gun, enters the police car fully clothed as a cop, and uses the car's computer to find the address of John Connor. He finds the address, along with a police sheet on John stating he's already committed several minor offenses like shoplifting and public disturbances.

The next day, John Connor's foster parents Todd (Xander Berkeley) and Janelle Voight (Jenette Goldstein) make several fruitless attempts to get John to clean up his room, but he ignores and ridicules them and leaves on his bike with his friend Tim (Danny Cooksey). As they rocket off, Tim plays Guns N' Roses on his small portable stereo.

In a cell at Pescadero State Hospital, a detention center for the criminally insane, Sarah Connor does chin-ups on her bed frame, which she has stood on end. Psychiatrist Dr. Peter Silberman (Earl Boen) is showing some interns around, telling them about Sarah's acute schizo-effective disorder. It leads her to believe that a machine in human guise, called a "Terminator", was sent back through time to kill her, and that the father of her child was a soldier from the future, sent back to protect her. Silberman bids her a good morning, to which Sarah pseudo-politely asks about his knee, which she stabbed with a pen some weeks before. Silberman has the interns take a look at her like she is a caged animal, informing them that she has tried repeatedly to escape. Silberman tells two orderlies that he doesn't like seeing patients disrupt the furniture arrangements in their rooms and to make sure that Sarah takes her medicine. The orderlies enter the cell, but Sarah refuses the medication. They tell her to be good because she is on review that afternoon, but when she still refuses, they smack her in the gut with a baton, kick her around and zap her with a taser before they force the medication down her throat and leave her..

The T-1000 arrives at the home of John Connor foster parents and ask about John. They tell him John took off on his bike. It asks for John's picture, saying it only needs to ask John some questions. Todd mentions that a big guy on a bike (the Terminator) had come by earlier asking about John that morning, but despite its suspicious glance, the T-1000 assures them not to worry.

John breaks into an ATM using a specialized decoding device. Tim finds a picture of Sarah in John's bag (it's the picture that was taken of Sarah at the end of the The Terminator (1984) and was later given to Kyle Reese). John comments that Sarah is a complete psycho, because she got arrested for trying to blow up a computer factory. They take off for the mall to spend the money they've stolen, missing the searching Terminator by a few blocks.

Sarah is in a deep sleep from the medication when she is woken by a familiar voice. It is Kyle Reese (Michael Biehn), the man who died protecting her from the first Terminator. He tells her that John is in danger and that she needs to protect him, to which she replies that he doesn't believe her anymore. Reese talks some strength back into her and repeats his earlier message: the future is not set, there is no fate but what we make for ourselves. She hugs him, but when she opens her eyes, Reese is standing in the cell door opening, saying that there is not much time left in the world. He walks away, and Sarah follows him out of the hospital. She finds herself on a sunny grass field behind a fence. On the other side are children playing in a playground. She tries to warn them away, but cannot speak. There is a sudden bright flash and she wakes up next to her bed in her cell.
