The Tiger Moth, a flying pirate ship commanded by a pink-haired woman called Dola (voice: Cloris Leachman in the Disney English dub) and manned by her seven or eight grown sons, spots a larger flying ship, from which a girl looks out a window. The men in the cabin with the girl wear dark suits and dark glasses (which is odd, as its dark outside). The men seem to recognize the pirates, who have apparently been lying in wait. They attack using small four-winged chariot-like fliers called flapters, dropping from the flapters to the top of the larger ship. Once inside, the pirates run through a crowd in a spacious glass-walled cabin&mdash;there's a party going on&mdash;and trade gunshots with some of the dark-suited men. Dola shouts "I want that girl!"

The leader of the dark suits enters the girl's cabin, and calling her Sheeta (voice: Anna Paquin), tells her to stay out of the way. He opens a suitcase that holds a transmitter and starts sending a message in Morse code. While he's occupied, Sheeta knocks him out with a wine bottle, reaches inside his jacket and from an inner pocket pulls a necklace, which she puts on. There's knocking and shouting outside the door, so she opens the window, climbs out, and clings to the side of the plane. The pirates burst into the room and recognize the unconscious man, Muska (voice: Mark Hamill). They nearly miss the girl, but one thinks to look out the window and spots her. Dola notices that she's wearing the necklace, and says "I want that crystal!"

Sheeta inches over to the next window, but one of the pirates gets into the room and rushes the window; she falls. "There goes my crystal!" wails Dola. Sheeta disappears into a cloud.

The opening credits show steampunk industrial scenes of mining, building flying machines, and islands floating in the sky.

Sheeta falls from the clouds and hurtles toward the ground, head-first and unconscious. Her crystal lights up and she falls more slowly, turning so she's lying face-up. She seems to be asleep and falling toward a lighted town; it's still dark.

On the ground, working-class folk in 19th-Century European clothes are shopping and talking. A boy (voice: James Van Der Beek) comes into a shop and asks for some meatballs for his boss. The man behind the counter, calling the boy Pazu (pronounced pot-zu), is surprised that the boy is still working at this hour.

Running back to work, the boy sees something falling from the sky, realizes it's a person, and catches Sheeta as she floats down into the open shaft of a mine. From down in the hole the mine boss (voice: John Hostetter) irately calls for his dinner, and is too busy with his malfunctioning machinery to listen when Pazu tries to tell him about the girl who came down from the sky. Pazu leaves Sheeta, still sleeping, on a platform near the top of the mine shaft and goes back to work. He operates the elevator hoist by himself for the first time, bringing up a crew of miners and their haul for the day, a small cartload of coal. They complain about not finding any silver or even tin. The boss, predicting that they'll all be starving soon, asks Pazu to shut off the boiler and oil the machinery, and goes home for the night.

Dola has returned to her ship, but her sons are out searching for Sheeta in their flapters. One complains there's too much cloud cover and it's too dark, but Dola won't call off the search. She tells them to call her captain, and they reply "yes, Mom," in unison.

The Legend of the Castle in the Sky

Next morning, Pazu wakes up at home&mdash;he slept on the floor&mdash;and sees Sheeta, still asleep in his bed. He climbs through a skylight to the roof and opens a window in a brick tower attached to his small wooden house, releasing some white doves. Then he climbs to the top of the tower and plays his trumpet. Pazu's house is perched on the lip of a cliff, and is part of a larger building that's mostly in ruins.

The trumpet wakes Sheeta, who climbs the ladder to the roof, following the music. Pazu shakes her hand and introduces himself, then gives her some food to feed the doves. She's surprised to hear from Pazu that he found her floating in the air; she remembers being in an airship, but nothing more. Pazu has a theory about how she can float; he asks to see her necklace. She hands it to him and says her grandmother gave it to her and it's been in her family for generations. The crystal is blue with a gold symbol. Pazu puts on the necklace and jumps off the roof. He doesn't float. Sheeta finds him in a hole; he's broken through a terrace into his own basement. The room is set up as a workshop, with the wooden framework of a plane in the middle of the floor. When Pazu goes back upstairs to see to breakfast, Sheeta notices a photograph on the wall that looks like an island or a fortress surrounded by clouds. Its captioned "Laputa."

Pazu finds her looking at the picture and says his father, who loved to fly, took it from an airship. He explains that most people think Laputa, the island that floats in the sky, is a legend. There's also a picture of Pazu's father's airship, and his journal, with drawings of the castle on the floating island. But nobody believed he'd seen it, and Pazu thinks that being called a liar killed his father. He says that as soon as he finishes building his plane, he'll prove that Laputa is real.

Beware of the Pirates

Sheeta sees a car pull up outside, and Dola looks out. Sheeta backs away from the window while Pazu exclaims "a real automobile! You don't see many of those around here!" Sheeta says the people in the car are pirates, and they attacked her airship. The pirates are much better dressed than they were the night before and look quite respectable, but Pazu immediately accepts that they're pirates and they're after Sheeta.

When the pirates come to the door, Pazu runs out, accompanied, apparently, by another boy. He stops when asked if he's seen a girl and says "there are about 100 little girls in this town&mdash;which one?" He and Sheeta run off as the second pirate, who went around and got in the back of the house, comes out holding Sheeta's bluish-purple dress and saying she must be in disguise now.

On the village street, a pair of pirates in white suits are asking Pazu's boss about a little girl in pigtails and a purple dress. When he says he hasn't seen her, Pazu can be heard in the distance shouting "Boss! Boss!" As Pazu and Sheeta come running up the street, the pirate Shalulu (voice: Michael McShane) urges the boss to think harder, saying "she would be about the age of those two." Sheeta trips and falls, dislodging her borrowed cap and exposing her pigtails. The pirates try to grab her but Pazu and Sheeta take refuge behind the boss; Pazu tells him the men are pirates and they're after Sheeta. Pazu's boss turns out to be standing outside his own front door. As the pirates approach and threaten the boss, Sheeta, then Pazu are pulled inside and told by the boss's wife to run out the back door.

Meanwhile at the front door, Shalulu, the beefiest pirate, tries to intimidate the boss by flexing his muscles and bursting out of his shirt. A crowd gathers, and the boss, who's pretty beefy himself, bursts his own buttons. His wife looks over his shoulder, frying pan at the ready, and remarks that she's not going to mend his now-shredded shirt. The two men fight. Soon the villagers in the street take exception to the other pirates' heckling and the fight become a melee.

The car pulls up to the edge of a cliff, from which Dola and a couple more pirates can see the village street. "Leave it to my little idiots to start a riot," she says. Then she spots Sheeta and Pazu running toward the railroad tracks. The kids jump on a moving train, tell the engineer (voice: Matt K. Miller) the Dola gang is after Sheeta, and ask to be dropped off at the police station in the next town. The engineer, who knows Pazu, asks no questions; all he says is "help me stoke up the engine."

Dola drives through the village to extract Shalulu and his party of pugilists, who are astonished to hear that Sheeta has escaped. The villagers chase the car and throw things as it drives off; Dola throws them a hand grenade "to remember us by."

The engineer spots the pirates' car approaching the moving train; he says the engine is old and can't go any faster. Dola drives the car onto the tracks and draws closer to the train in a hair-raising chase over rickety trestles. When they catch up, Pazu releases the empty cars behind the engine and the train pulls away, but the pirates' car is moving so fast it pushes the loose cars ahead of it and they quickly catch up with the laboring engine. Pazu cranks up the brakes on the lead car and it slows down, separating the pirates from the engine before they can grab Sheeta. As Pazu waves good-bye from the engine, Dola, sounding like the Wicked Witch of the West, says "you'll get yours!"

The pirates heave a train car off the tracks, but pause as they're trying to jettison the second one because Dola notices a military spy plane, which she thinks is Muska.

Meanwhile, the engineer stops because there's an army engine coming toward him. He cheerfully says "it's the army to the rescue!" and asks for help for the kids, but Sheeta quickly realizes that the men coming from the military engine look just like the ones who were working with Muska. She says "good-bye, Pazu," and takes off, bad guys in pursuit. Pazu trips them before running after Sheeta. The quick-witted engineer scalds the bad guys with his steam-powered brakes when they try to shoot the fleeing kids.

The kids almost immediately see the Dola gang coming at them; they're still on a trestle, but Sheeta runs down a siding, telling Pazu not to follow her or he'll get hurt. The Dola gang catches up to them, destroying the trestle as they approach. Pazu and Sheeta jump off and dangle precariously as the gang's train car passes over them. Dola watches Sheeta and Pazu fall toward the town below and then, with a flash of light, they float back up as Sheeta's crystal saves them.

Pazu tells Sheeta, "this is what happened the first time I saw you&mdash;I knew there was something special about that necklace." Dola isn't surprised and tells her sons, "it's the power of the crystal." The soldiers from the armored train can see the kids too. They float gently down into a mineshaft.

The pirates go after them, while overhead, the spy plane watches.

Lost in the Mine

Sheeta's crystal, which has been glowing, goes dark when they land at the bottom of the shaft, but Pazu has a lantern. They walk for a bit in the old mine, then sit down to eat. (Pazu is still carrying the fried egg on toast he made for breakfast.) Asked where she's from, Sheeta says "I come from Gondoa, deep in the northern mountains." After her parents died, she cared for their farm animals until some men came and took her away&mdash;the same men in dark glasses who are now pursuing her.