Pazu realizes that the men and Dola are both after the crystal, which Sheeta didn't realize was so powerful. She says her mother gave it to her before she died, and told her never to show it or give it away to anyone. Pazu says "we orphans should stick together." Sheeta apologizes for getting him mixed up in her problems, but Pazu isn't sorry at all: "this is the most exciting thing that's ever happened to me!"

The children are frightened when they hear someone approaching, but it's an old miner friend of Pazu's, Uncle Pom (voice: Richard Dysart). They tell him there are pirates chasing them and the army is right behind the pirates, and Uncle Pom thinks that sounds splendid. He takes them to his camp by an underground lake and gives them tea. He says that the rocks speak to him, and they've been restless since last night. Then he blows out the lamp, leaving them in the silent darkness.

It doesn't stay dark long. Soon crystals on the floor, ceiling, and walls around them start to glow. Pazu wonders what's doing that, and Uncle Pom cracks open a rock to show him; it briefly glows. He says "it's a long-forgotten element called aetherium. People no longer know how to mine aetherium." Sheeta pulls out her crystal, which is glowing. The old man says "that's a pure aetherium crystal!" Pom tells them such crystals haven't existed since his great-grandfather's time; according to legend, only the people of the floating city of Laputa knew how to make them. It's aetherium that makes Laputa float. After a few minutes Uncle Pom is overcome and asks Sheeta to put the crystal away&mdash;"it's speaking too loudly to me, too sadly."

Uncle Pom's great-grandfather told him that the rocks become restless when Laputa appears over the mine. He tells Sheeta that the crystal's power comes from the earth, and to use it selfishly will bring great unhappiness.

Outside, the military spy plane flies off and the disheveled pirates, who are peeking out of the mine, ask Dola if they can go back to the ship. She says it's too quiet; they decide to sit tight.

The kids say goodbye to Uncle Pom at another entrance to the mine.

Captured

Once outdoors, Pazu and Sheeta climb a steep hill and stop to admire a huge cloud. Pazu is sure the cloud is hiding Laputa. Sheeta says she hasn't told him the traditional name her family gave her: Lusheeta Toel Ul Laputa. While they're talking, a plane spots them and lands nearby; they're captured by army men in green uniforms and a man in a dark suit and dark glasses, who knocks Pazu out with the butt of his pistol. Muska disembarks from the plane and growls "and about time!" when told they've been captured.

Pazu comes to in a bare cell in a coastal fortress. He hears soldiers drilling outside his arrow-slit window, but can't see them.

In a room above, Muska tells a portly general (voice: Jim Cummings) that they'll get what they want, but it will take time. The general responds that they're wasting time; Muska should twist an arm or two and the girl will talk. Muska says military tactics risk wasting more time. The general says military tactics would have saved them from Dola's interference, but Muska replies, "it was a military transmission that the pirates decoded." He says the general's job is to mobilize the troops when the time comes. The general says he's in charge of finding Laputa; Muska counters that as the government's secret agent, he's in charge of the general.

Sheeta huddles on a window seat in a sunny tower room. Muska walks in and picks up a dress, remarking that it's fit for a princess. Sheeta asks if Pazu's all right and asks to see him. "Your friend is being treated as if he were the guest of royalty," he says.

He takes her down in an elevator to show her a battered, broken giant robot. "Laputa was just a legend until this dropped from the sky." Muska explains that his job is to figure out the robot's&mdash;Laputa's&mdash;secrets. He points out a small red shield on the robot's chest; it bears the same symbol as Sheeta's crystal. He needs her help to get the crystal to lead them to Laputa. Sheeta tells him to keep the crystal and take Laputa's treasures for himself. Muska, trying to convince her that it's not about the money, says Laputa used to dominate the world, and it's still dangerous. And the stone only works for her. Sheeta just wants to see Pazu. Muska says if she'll cooperate, she can help free Pazu. If she won't, he can't control what the military might do to him. Then Muska calls her by her real name, Lusheeta Toel Ul Laputa. "Toel means ruler in Laputian; Ul means true. You are the legitimate heir to the throne of Laputa, Princess Lusheeta." Sheeta is stunned.

A Broken Promise

Pazu, meanwhile, is climbing the walls of his cell when a soldier comes to let him out to see Sheeta and Muska. Muska says there's been a misunderstanding; they had no idea how bravely he fought to defend Sheeta from the pirates. Pazu is confused, and still more confused when Sheeta tells him to forget about Laputa. Muska says Sheeta has agreed to help the army search (secretly) for Laputa, and Pazu really should forget about it. Pazu objects, but Sheeta leaves. Muska gives Pazu several gold coins "to show our appreciation of your efforts." Pazu walks out of the fortress. As Sheeta watches him go from her window, Muska fastens the crystal around her neck and tells her to remember the words that bring the crystal to life. "Keep your promise and you too will be free."

In the mining village, it's evening. A small child with a broom chases a pig out of her house. She see Pazu walking slowly up the street and calls her mother, the boss's wife, who comes out to say they've all been worried, and where has he been and what happened to his friend? Pazu only says "it's over now," and runs off. He comes to his own front door and finds the pirates making themselves at home. They discover the gold in his pocket and accuse him of selling Sheeta out; he replies that he only left because Sheeta told him to. "So you believed her and you came back here?" sneers Dola. Dola suggests that the army forced Sheeta to make a deal to save Pazu's life, and they're not likely to keep Sheeta alive once they get what they want.

A telegraph receiver on the table comes to life. Dola translates the Morse code: "They're calling for air destroyer Goliath. They're about to take off with Sheeta. We've got to hurry or it will be too late!"

Pazu begs to come with them. Dola agrees, thinking he'll be useful in getting Sheeta to cooperate. He grabs his father's aviator headgear, complete with goggles, and opens the dovecote so his birds can get out and feed themselves while he's gone. The pirates take off in their flapters, Pazu riding with Dola.

The huge airship Goliath arrives at the fortress as Muska and the general watch. The general asks if the girl has surrendered the information yet; Muska says it will take a little more time. The general says they'll have plenty of time aboard Goliath, and they'll depart at first light.

The Rescue

The pirates buzz through the night in their flapters. Dola urges them to hurry as they have to get there before sun-up. Pazu thinks of Sheeta.

Sheeta's looking out at the night and remembering a time when her grandmother taught her a spell that would help her if she was ever in trouble. Sheeta learned the words in Laputian; in English, they mean "Save me and revive the eternal light." She recites the Laputian, and her crystal lights up and emits so much energy that she cries out in distress and tries to cover her eyes. Far below, the robot is activated and its broken parts move together. Muska comes into her room, saying "the sacred light! The ancient documents were true&mdash;it's not just a legend!"

He reaches for the glowing crystal but it seems to hurt him. He pulls his hand back but demands that she tell him the spell. The soldiers guarding the robot think they hear something and open its door, which it blocks when they try to close it again. They get on the phone to say the robot is alive. It bursts out of its prison; at the same moment, the crystal goes dark. When Sheeta and Muska come out of her room, they see the robot climbing the stairs toward them. The soldiers shoot at it, doing no damage, then shut the fire door at the top of the stairs. The robot melts it. Muska is amazed at the robot's power. He realizes the crystal has brought it to life. The robot uses a laser to cut the wooden walkway where Muska, Sheeta, and others are standing; the pieces separate, leaving Sheeta alone on one side. The robot unfurls its wings, flies up the inside of the tower, and follows the terrified Sheeta up the stairs at the top. On the roof of the tower, her crystal flashes again and points through the clouds&mdash;at Laputa, she and Muska both believe, but we can't see it. The robot breaks through the roof of the tower as the soldiers bring their artillery to bear on it. The robot communes with the crystal for a moment before it's hit by a shell and falls. The soldiers try to revive Sheeta, who groans, and then the robot comes back to life. It picks her up and starts shooting with its laser eye. It does a lot of damage to the fortress, leaving much of it in flames, and starts setting fire to the surrounding countryside.

From their flapters, the pirates see the fortress lit up in the distance. The sun is beginning to rise. When Sheeta comes to, she tells the robot to stop, climbing up to sit on its shoulder. But by then everything around them is burning.

Pazu has spotted them, though, and directs Dola to the top of the tower. In trying to get close enough to grab her, they clip the tower; Dola is knocked out and the flapter plummets toward the water below until, at the last moment, Pazu gets to the controls and pulls out of the dive. Dola recovers and they make another attempt to get Sheeta. The robot, which seems to be in some kind of trouble itself&mdash;burning out from within&mdash;has put Sheeta on the battlements of the tower. Muska sees what they're up to just as Pazu, hanging upside-down from the flapter, grabs Sheeta. "It's not over," Muska promises himself as the pirates fly off.

An Adventurous Trip

As the general expresses his anger over the loss of Sheeta and the robot and orders a pursuit, one of Muska's men draws Muska away: "I think we may have found what you've been looking for." Muska finds Sheeta's crystal on the ground near the tower, still pointing to Laputa. He's able to pick it up. He sends a message to the general that they'll be departing on time.

Sheeta cries on Pazu's shoulder as the pirates fly them toward Pazu's home. Dola is annoyed because Sheeta lost the crystal. Pazu asks if they can sail with the pirates. They say they'll work, and Sheeta says she needs to find out about Laputa for herself. They fly over Pazu's house but keep going and rejoin the pirates' airship, the Tiger Moth. One of Dolas sons takes Pazu to the engine room and introduces Pazu to his father, a short bald man with a huge mustache. He's the ship's engineer, and he needs an assistant. Pazu immediately shows his mechanical ability. After conferring with Sheeta about the location of Laputa, Dola announces that Goliath is heading for Laputa and they're going after her. The first to spot Laputa will get 10 gold coins.
