The tale of Princess Mononoke is a fantasy adventure: an epic struggle between humanity and nature. The story's competing interests-- comprised of cursed monsters, an assortment of people driven by ambition, a selfless hero, and vengeful gods--are remarkable in that there is no villain, instead portraying darkness and hate as it manifests in everyone. (Note: This synopsis describes the English version of the film.)

Ashitaka and the Demon

The film opens on a view of a mountainous forest shrouded in mist. A voiceover explains ancient gods and giant beasts inhabit the forests, owing their allegiance to the Forest Spirit. The ancient gods once lived harmoniously with humans, but times have changed. The forest is disappearing and now is the age of gods and demons.

Ashitaka (English: Billy Crudup, Japanese: Yôji Matsuda) is a prince of the dwindling Emishi people living in the eastern forest. He rides his red elk, Yakul, up the hillside from his village passing three girls along the way, including Kaya (English: Tara Strong), his younger sister (or, in the Japanese version, the girl Ashitaka has promised to marry). He tells the girls that the village oracle, Hii-sama (Japanese: Mitsuko Mori), has sensed trouble and is ordering everyone back to the village. Kaya tells him the old man Ji-san noticed something from his watchtower, so Ashitaka rides to see him. Ashitaka climbs the tower and watches as a creature covered in wormy tendrils violently emerges from the forest. In the sun, it's revealed to be a massive boar that has turned into a demon: a tatari gami. It knocks down the tower but Ashitaka and Ji-san leap to safety before Ashitaka pursues it on Yakul.

He pleads with the demon to spare their village, but the boar doesn't listen. When it attacks the three village girls, Ashitaka is forced to intervene, killing it with two of his arrows. During the fight, the demon's tendrils latch onto Ashitaka's right arm and, with the killing blow, dissolve, burning his skin. Villagers rush up the hill, one of them carrying the elderly oracle. She gives Ashitaka some water to pour over his arm before bowing before the boar, promising to perform rites and asking it to bear them no ill will. The demon bitterly responds, saying they will know its hate and grief. It dies, decomposing into a skeleton.

That evening Hii-sama calls the village elders together in her hut and performs a divination using fortune stones to interpret the day's events. She tells Ashitaka to show his scarred arm to the others and asks if he's ready to hear his fate. When Ashitaka states his resolve, she reveals the scar will spread and eventually kill him. However, instead of waiting to die, he can rise to meet his fate. She gives him an iron ball recovered from the boar's body, believing it to be the cause of his demonic transformation. The oracle tells Ashitaka to ride to the west to see with eyes unclouded but warns him he can never return. Ashitaka agrees, cutting his topknot as a symbol of his separation, and leaves.

As he rides Yakul out of the village, Kaya approaches him, breaking the taboo of seeing a banished person. She gives him her crystal dagger necklace. Ashitaka thanks her and says he will never forget her. He rides off, Kaya staring after him.

The Strength of the Curse

Ashitaka and Yakul travel many miles westward, across plains and mountains. One day, they see smoke in the distance and discover samurai soldiers fighting with unarmed villagers. Ashitaka rushes to the defense of a woman but, as he pulls back on his bow, his arm throbs visibly and when the arrow is released it flies with such force that it takes the samurai's sword and lodges it in a tree, with the man's arms still attached. Two samurai on horseback threaten to intercept Ashitaka. He yells at them to let him pass, but when they refuse, he releases another arrow, decapitating one. The other watches Ashitaka flee, convinced he's a demon.

As he cools his right arm under a small waterfall, Ashitaka notices the mark is growing. In a town, Ashitaka attempts to buy rice with a gold nugget. The seller refuses it at first, saying it isn't money, but a monk named Jigo (English: Billy Bob Thornton, Japanese: Kaoru Kobayashi) remarks that the nugget is pure gold and worth several bags of rice. Ashitaka quickly leaves the growing crowd with his single bag.

Jigo follows Ashitaka as he leaves town, commenting that he noticed Ashitaka's fighting skills against the samurai earlier. They see some thugs following them, no doubt after Ashitaka's gold, and Jigo proposes a quick getaway. They camp together later, cooking their rice, and Jigo mentions an ancient people called the Emishi who made bowls and arrows like Ashitaka's and who were rumored to ride red elk like Ashitaka's, though he hints he'll keep the prince's secret. Ashitaka tells Jigo about his experience with the boar demon and his quest to discover its origins and shows Jigo the iron ball. Jigo doesn't think much of Ashitaka's curse ("You're under a curse? So what? So's the whole damn world"), but he does tell him of a mining town further to the west, surrounded by ancient forests where giant gods still dwell. The next morning Ashitaka leaves quietly to continue his journey alone while Jigo sleeps.

Gods and Spirits

On a rain-slicked mountainside, a caravan of oxen and men carrying rice moves along a narrow path. Their leader, Lady Eboshi (English: Minnie Driver, Japanese: Yûko Tanaka), keeps watch with her first lieutenant, Gonza (English: John DiMaggio, Japanese: Tsunehiko Kamijô). Suddenly she notices two giant, white wolves charging down the muddy slope. A masked girl rides one of them, holding her spear high. Eboshi orders her men to open fire with their ishibiya, or hand cannons. The shots drive off the wolves and Gonza remarks that they weren't so big. Eboshi responds that they were just pups; "wait till you see their mother."

As if on cue, Moro (English: Gillian Anderson, Japanese: Akihiro Miwa) attacks the caravan, sending people and oxen tumbling down the mountain. Moro is more than twice the size of her pups and has two tails. The guards use a flame-thrower to set her on fire and Lady Eboshi shoots her in the chest, sending her off the cliff. The surviving men are pleased with themselves, but Eboshi reminds them that it takes more than that to kill a god. She urges the survivors onward and tells them to forget about those who fell.

Meanwhile, at the base of the mountain, Ashitaka arrives at a river swollen from the rainfall. He sees bodies floating by and pulls out two injured men, casualties from Lady Eboshi's rice caravan. Ashitaka notices the massive body of Moro on the other side of the river, along with her pups. He watches as the warrior girl, San (English: Akihiro Miwa, Japanese: Yuriko Ishida), tends to Moro, trying to suck the bullet from her wound and spitting out blood. Moro's growling alerts San to Ashitaka's presence. He introduces himself and asks if they are ancient gods. San tells him to go away before disappearing into the forest with the wolves.

A scream brings Ashitaka back to where he left the injured men. One of them, Kouroku the ox-driver (English: John DeMita, Japanese: Masahiko Nishimura), has woken up and is trying to get away from a small white spirit with a bobbing head, despite his broken leg and arm. Ashitaka calms him and tells him that it's a kodama, a tree spirit, and it--and the others that begin to appear--are a sign that the forest is healthy. However, Kouroku is worried the creature will bring its master, a large forest spirit. Ashitaka politely asks the kodama for safe passage through the forest and carries the unconscious man, a gunner, while Kouroku rides Yakul.

The kodama lead them to a beautiful and mysterious part of the wood where mossy trees grow among pools of clear water. Ashitaka sees the footprints of San and the wolves. He sets the gunner down to fetch some water and notices the tracks of a three-toed animal he doesn't recognize. He scans the area and spots a herd of deer followed closely by one with many antlers. It stops and Ashitaka's arm suddenly throbs and moves on its own. He struggles to subdue it but only regains control when the mysterious deer vanishes. After the incident, Ashitaka notices the gunner he's carrying seems a bit lighter.

Iron Town

They emerge from the forest where they see the iron town Tatara, a large settlement across a lake. The town is protected by a tall wooden stockade. They are welcomed by a crowd and Kouroku explains how Ashitaka rescued them. Gonza approaches and demands to know who Ashitaka is and how he managed to walk through the forbidden forest with two injured men. He is cut short when Kouroku's wife, Toki (English: Jada Pinkett Smith, Japanese: Sumi Shimamoto), runs down and berates Kouroku for getting injured and risking his livelihood. She takes a moment to thank Ashitaka before criticizing Gonza for not taking better care of his men. Lady Eboshi appears above and apologizes to Kouroko and Toki before inviting Ashitaka to see her later so she can thank him.

Ashitaka eats with the men of Iron Town. Some of the women stop by and invite him to see where they work. They heckle the men before leaving, giggling to themselves. The women are former prostitutes, the men explain; Lady Eboshi buys the contracts of every brothel girl she finds. However, since fearless Eboshi came to Tatara, things have changed for the better. They tell of Nago, the boar god who once ruled the forest surrounding the town. Nago became enraged when the men cut trees down to get at the ore beneath the ground and often attacked with his herd of boars. When Eboshi came with her gunners, she set fire to the forest and shot Nago. Ashitaka's arm swells in anger as he realizes that it was Nago who inflicted his cursed wound, and Lady Eboshi who turned Nago into a demon.