The Galactic Empire (19 BBY–5 ABY), also known as the First Galactic Empire, the New Order, or simply the Empire, was the fascist galactic government that replaced the Galactic Republic in the aftermath of the Clone Wars.

Secretly ruled by Dark Lord of the Sith Darth Sidious—publicly known as Galactic Emperor Palpatine—the new regime rose to power with a groundswell of populist support, promising peace and stability from the destructive Clone Wars and capitalizing on anti-Jedi and anti-droid sentiment. The subsequent Age of the Empire would last only two decades in contrast to the centuries of the Republic Era, but not before the Jedi Order was systematically purged and almost eradicated, and the galaxy largely conquered.

The Empire stood virtually unchallenged until numerous insurgent cells united to form the Alliance to Restore the Republic in 2 BBY. The Galactic Civil War ensued with the theft of the Death Star plans on Scarif which, in turn, led to the destruction of the Empire's superweapon at the Battle of Yavin in 0 BBY. The following years saw initial Alliance successes until a major Imperial victory on Hoth in 3 ABY, only to suffer a devastating defeat a year later at the Battle of Endor. During the battle, Emperor Palpatine was slain at the hands of his apprentice Darth Vader, who also died shortly after turning against his master.

With the Sith extinct, the Empire fractured into several remnant factions that were dominated by Moffs, admirals and generals, many of whom ignored Grand Vizier Mas Amedda's authority as the de jure Imperial successor. In this fractured state, Imperial holdouts were referred to as Imperial remnants. The largest remnant was publicly led by Grand Admiral Rae Sloane and covertly ruled by Fleet Admiral Gallius Rax and his Shadow Council. Ultimately, Rax seized control over the largest faction of the Imperial Navy after removing Sloane from power; and therefore, became Emperor-in-effect through his new position as Counselor to the Empire. Under Rax's rule, the Empire made its final stand at the Battle of Jakku in 5 ABY, ultimately losing to the New Republic. While several remnants continued to resist, the Empire formally capitulated to the New Republic with the signing of the Galactic Concordance.

During the era of the New Republic, war reparations and disarmament treaties reduced the Empire to a rump state ruled by hardliners. What remained of the old establishment was forced to remain within the borders of the Core and Inner Rim and agree to punitive stipulations. The central government on Coruscant was reorganized into a provincial administration overseen by New Republic observers. In the decades that followed the Imperial government's dissolution, it was remembered as the Old Empire.

Following the Empire's defeat, surviving loyalists, technocrats, and military leaders fled to the galaxy's Unknown Regions to form the First Order, a military junta based on the ideals of the Old Empire as per the Emperor's posthumous contingency plan. In time the First Order evolved into a military junta led by Supreme Leader Snoke who like Sidious, was a master of the dark side of the Force—although he was not a Sith Lord. In 34 ABY, the First Order attacked the New Republic, ending the decades-long cold war. Even without Starkiller Base, which had been subsequently destroyed in battle by the Resistance, the First Order stood poised to conquer the galaxy in the wake of the New Republic's collapse. By then, Snoke had been assassinated by Kylo Ren, the grandson of Darth Vader, who envisioned himself at the head of a new galactic order—one that would surpass the Empire, the Republic, and all that came before.

Contents[show]
HistoryEdit
Early foundationsEdit
Blue Glass Arrow Main articles: Invasion of Naboo and Separatist Crisis
"I have good news for you, my Lord. The war has begun."
"Excellent. Everything is going as planned."
―Dooku and Darth Sidious — Gnome-speakernotesListen (file info)[src]
For at least a thousand years,[20] the dominant governing body of the galaxy was the unicameral and democratic Galactic Republic, led by an elected Supreme Chancellor.[20][21]

In the last decades of its existence, the Republic Senate became mired in bureaucracy, rendering it woefully ineffectual as a governing body. Darth Sidious, the Dark Lord of the Sith known publicly as Senator Sheev Palpatine of Naboo, privately lamented the declining state of the Senate, noting that the Republic was "not what it once was."[21][22]

Thirteen years before the Republic's end as a democracy, Darth Sidious orchestrated the invasion of Naboo by the Trade Federation, in order to create a leadership crisis in the Senate. Sidious used the crisis to manipulate the then Queen of the Naboo, Amidala, into calling a Vote of No Confidence against sitting Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum. The vote passed, and in the subsequent election, Sidious—in his public persona of Palpatine—secured the position of Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic for himself.[21] Ultimately, he would be the last individual to hold this office.[3]

In the decade that followed, Sidious secretly manipulated galactic events to the extent that war became inevitable. Besides persuading a dead Jedi Master, Sifo-Dyas, to create a secret clone army, he also tasked his Sith apprentice, Darth Tyranus, with exacerbating political tensions in the Republic and engineering a Separatist Crisis. These actions would culminate in the outbreak of the Clone Wars, the last conflict of the Republic, while Sidious himself "reluctantly" accepted emergency powers.