"It is an honor to stand before you, for you represent the freedom and the future of our galaxy. The once-great Republic and Jedi Order have become victims of their own ambitions, and the Supreme Chancellor is no more than a pawn of corporate monopolies. As a people you called out for change, you called out for leadership, and I humbly answered that call. Together we challenged the system. We asked for equality. And how were we met? With war! The Jedi secret army of clones was revealed, and their treachery was far greater than we could have imagined! Countless living beings—these clones the Jedi created—have been sent to their deaths, while we sacrifice mainly droids. Our soldiers of flesh and blood are willing participants! They are your fathers and sons, mothers and daughters, who fight not because they were grown and designed to do so, but because they know in their hearts that they are fighting for a just and noble cause!"
―Head of State Dooku addresses a gala of Separatist dignitaries[src]
The Confederacy of Independent Systems (CIS), also known as the Separatist Alliance, the Separatist State, and commonly referred to as the Separatists, was a partially recognized galactic government that controlled a portion of the Mid Rim and Outer Rim Territories. Formed by thousands of secessionist star systems on the grounds of excessive taxation and corruption within the Galactic Senate, the Separatists were led by the former Jedi Count Dooku, who served as the Alliance's Head of State. In addition the Separatists were secretly supported by several corporations, including the Trade Federation, the Techno Union, the Retail Caucus, the InterGalactic Banking Clan, the Commerce Guild, and the Corporate Alliance.

The secessionist movement that began in 24 BBY would lead to a political crisis in which tensions escalated between the newly-formed alliance and the reigning Republic. In 22 BBY, the Confederacy and the Republic went to war using their respective military forces—the droid army and the Republic clone army—resulting in a pan-galactic conflict for the first time in a millennium.

The following three years would see the Clone Wars rage across the galaxy with the Separatists rapidly attempting to bring the Republic to its knees. Unknown to the majority of the galaxy, however, the war was merely a ploy—Supreme Chancellor Sheev Palpatine, the leader of the Republic, was a Sith Lord called Darth Sidious, who controlled the Separatists through Dooku, and therefore influenced both sides in the war. By 19 BBY, the Confederacy suffered several major defeats in the Outer Rim Sieges as the end of the war approached. After Dooku's death, the Separatist Council was executed on Mustafar. With the subsequent shutdown of the droid army, the state rapidly collapsed as the war came to an end. Following the end of hostilities, trade groups that had supported the cause were nationalized, and most of its remaining star systems rejoined the Republic's successor state; the Galactic Empire, whether voluntarily or under threat while some elements fragmented into several holdouts.

For one thousand years, the galaxy had been governed through the Galactic Republic. A democratic union centered on the capital world of Coruscant, the Republic was ruled by the Galactic Senate led by an elected Supreme Chancellor. With the assistance of the Jedi Order acting as peacekeepers, the Republic enjoyed a millennia without large-scale war. However, as time went on, the government of the Republic became weak and corrupt.[1]

During this era of peace, heightening political tensions arose within the Republic a decade before the Clone Wars, such as when a group of usurpers on the planet Halcyon became discontent with the world's membership and wanted their world to be able to manage its own affairs. They kidnapped several members of Halcyon's planetary leadership and held them in a remote fortress where they prepared for assault while attempting negotiation with their hostages. Internal negotiations failed and led the Senate to eventually authorize the Jedi Order to intervene on Halcyon as mediators and enforcers if necessary.[10]

The Invasion of Naboo by the Trade Federation exposed the unwillingness and inability of the Senate to resolve the crisis, which ended only after the Gungans and Royal House of Naboo united and forcibly ended the occupation. This lack of action was a result of years of corrupt and ineffectual governance by the Republic that had became mired in bureaucracy and layers upon layers of increasingly complex legal precedents, treaties, and obligations. The commerce guilds and trading corporations had also become disillusioned after laws were passed that would introduce taxes affecting all significant trade routes, implemented such that they would have the greatest impact on the poorer outlying star systems. These worlds were often forced into accepting one-sided deals and refused military protection, as the Republic continued to prioritize honoring centuries old agreements predating the admission of outlying planets. Compounding this, the outlying systems and Rimward trade routes were plagued by pirates, hijackers and slavers. Due to the refusal of the Republic to create a military to police those sectors, the Judicial Department was completely overwhelmed, and could not adequately protect either the worlds along those trade routes, or the cargo vessels that traversed them. This forced outlying systems to begin creating their own militias to deal with the pirates, with the Outland Regions Security Force being foremost among them. Gridlock in the senate grew, as the number of votes needed to pass any type of legislation turned it increasingly into a place where senators bartered favors, earmarks, and votes for personal power without regard for their constituencies or the greater good of the Republic. Some began to believe that any attempt at change would require radical thinking and extreme actions, leading to discussions of secession from the Republic.