On the moon of Oba Diah, Plo Koon examines a signal from a ship of a Jedi that was long presumed lost. Through a fierce sandstorm, Plo finds the spaceship and discovers the lightsaber of Sifo-Dyas. Plo communicates his discovery to the Jedi High Council where Yoda confirms the lightsaber to be that of Sifo-Dyas. Mace Windu remarks that Sifo-Dyas was on the council before the Invasion of Naboo, but, because he foresaw a Great Conflict and that the Republic needed to raise an army, his ideas was considered "too extreme". Obi-Wan Kenobi reminds them that, during his chase for Jango Fett, he learned that it was Sifo-Dyas who ordered the creation of the clone troopers on Kamino. Yoda feels that more is going on here and wants to find the truth.

Jocasta Nu says that Sifo-Dyas had died on Felucia during a diplomatic mission between mutual tribes of Jungle Felucians. The end of the mission was classified by the office of the Supreme Chancellor. While Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker travel to Felucia, Yoda questions Chancellor Palpatine about the file, who claims he has never heard of the Jedi Master and says that the file was handled by his predecessor Finis Valorum, since he was still a Senator at the time. Meanwhile, Darth Sidious chastises Dooku to tie up this "loose end."

Before heading to Valorum, Yoda is told that the Felucians cremated Sifo-Dyas' body and that another Jedi was with him. Valorum explains that Sifo-Dyas was sent to negotiate with the Pykes regarding an underground war. However, the negotiations were postponed as Yoda ordered Syfo-Dias to intervene in a conflict on Felucia. When asked about the other Jedi, Valorum says only his personal aid, Silman, accompanied Sifo-Dyas.

Anakin and Obi-Wan travel to Oba Diah to confront the Pyke Syndicate regarding the situation. Lom Pyke reveals that a man named Tyranus had paid them to shoot down the ship and that for insurance, Silman was kept locked away by the Pykes.

Silman, who has been imprisoned for up to 10 years, has lost his mind. He says the Pykes are not to be trusted, but is suddenly killed by Dooku before he can reveal who really killed the Jedi Master. Anakin and Obi-Wan engage Dooku in combat where Lom reveals that the man called Tyranus is really Count Dooku. Dooku then reveals to Obi Wan that he was telling the truth on Geonosis all along. Dooku kills Lom and duels Anakin for a short time before defeating him and managing to escape. On Coruscant, the Council deduces that Dooku was responsible for the creation of the clone army. Questioning why their enemy created them an army for them, Yoda explains that this must really be the work of the Dark Lord of the Sith and that all they could do is "play his game".