Solo: A Star Wars Story is a stand-alone Star Wars film directed by Ron Howard from a screenplay by Lawrence Kasdan and Jon Kasdan, released Worldwide on May 25, 2018. It stars Alden Ehrenreich as Han Solo in the years prior to Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope. Donald Glover portrays Lando Calrissian and Joonas Suotamo portrays the Wookiee Chewbacca. Woody Harrelson, Emilia Clarke, Thandie Newton, and Phoebe Waller-Bridge also star.

The film was first announced as a Han Solo picture in 2015, along with the news that Phil Lord and Christopher Miller would be the film's directors. Principal photography began in January 2017, after which creative differences arose between the two directors and the studio. They were replaced by Ron Howard, who was tasked with completing principal photography along with what was reported to be extensive re-shoots.

Solo held its world premiere on May 10, 2018 in Los Angeles, and it was screened at the 2018 Cannes Film Festival on May 15. The film received generally positive reviews from critics, who praised the performances, music, and visuals, although some felt that the story was weak. Solo received a nomination for Best Visual Effects at the 91st Academy Awards.

Contents[show]
Official descriptionEdit
Board the Millennium Falcon and journey to a galaxy far, far away in Solo: A Star Wars Story, an all-new adventure with the most beloved scoundrel in the galaxy. Through a series of daring escapades deep within a dark and dangerous criminal underworld, Han Solo meets his mighty future copilot Chewbacca and encounters the notorious gambler Lando Calrissian, in a journey that will set the course of one of the Star Wars saga's most unlikely heroes.[15]

PrologueEdit
SOLO: A STAR WARS STORY
It is a lawless time.

CRIME SYNDICATES compete for resources – food, medicine, and HYPERFUEL.

On the shipbuilding planet of CORELLIA, the foul LADY PROXIMA forces runaways into a life of crime in exchange for shelter and protection.

On these mean streets, a young man fights for survival, but yearns to fly among the stars....
SynopsisEdit
Escaping CorelliaEdit
White Worms&#039; Den Databank
Han and Qi'ra defy Lady Proxima

Six years after the formation of the Galactic Empire, on the shipbuilding world of Corellia, a human "scrumrat" and aspiring pilot named Han and his love Qi'ra long to escape the clutches of Lady Proxima's White Worms crime syndicate. Following a delivery job that went awry, Han defies Proxima in the presence of her henchmen and the other scrumrats. After wounding the Grindalid by exposing her to sunlight, Han and Qi'ra flee on a stolen speeder with a vial of valuable hyperfuel coaxium.

Intending to escape offworld, Han and Qi'ra flee to Coronet Spaceport with the White Worms gang in pursuit. Using the coaxium as a bargaining chip, Han and Qi'ra manage to bribe the Imperial Emigration Officer Falthina Sharest into granting them passage on an outgoing transport. Before Qi'ra can cross into the other side of the terminal, she is apprehended by the White Worms enforcers. Qi'ra tells Han to flee and he vows to return for her.

Lacking sufficient funds to travel offworld, Han is recruited by the Imperial recruitment officer Drawd Munbrin into joining the Imperial Navy as a flight cadet. Munbrin promises Han that he will be flying in no time and dubs him "Han Solo" in absence of a surname.

Ordeals on MimbanEdit
"Well, this ain't a quick job, it's a war!"
―Rio Durant to Tobias Beckett[src]
Swamptroopers Val &amp; Beckett
Han encountered Tobias Beckett and Val on Mimban.

Three years later, Han has been expelled from the Imperial Flight Academy on Carida for insubordination, and is serving as a Mudtrooper Corporal during a battle on the planet Mimban. Solo's 224th Imperial Armored Division is locked in trench warfare against the Mimbanese Liberation Army, enduring heavy casualties in the torrid, muddy weather. Disenchanted with the Empire's promises, Solo regards the Imperials as occupiers on Mimban and earns the enmity of his commanding officer, Lieutenant Bolandin.

Later, Solo encounters Tobias Beckett, Val, and the Ardennian Rio Durant, a gang of criminals who had disguised themselves as Imperial Army soldiers to pull off a heist. Seeking to escape offworld, Solo tries to blackmail them into allow him to join their gang by threatening to expose them as infiltrators. However, Beckett turns the tables on him and convinces Lieutenant Bolandin that Solo is trying to desert. Seeking an opportunity to rid his unit of a "trouble-maker", Bolandin has Solo thrown into a pen where he is condemned to battle a "beast" held in captivity.

The beast is revealed to be a Wookiee named Chewbacca, whose species has been enslaved by the Empire. Owing to Han's ability to speak Shyriiwook, Solo convinces Chewbacca that he is a friend. Working together, the two stage a fight for the benefit of their captors after discovering that one of the pillars supporting the mesh above their cell is weak. Solo's plan works and the two are able to breach the mesh above Chewbacca's pen, allowing them to climb out and escape. They convince a sympathetic Beckett and his gang to allow them to escape aboard their stolen Y-45 armored transport hauler.

After Han and Chewbacca's escape from Mimban, Beckett enlists the two for a planned train heist to steal a shipment of the hyperfuel refined coaxium from a 20-T Railcrawler conveyex transport on the snowy, mountainous planet Vandor. On the night before the heist, Beckett warns the gang of the threat posed by Enfys Nest and the Cloud-Riders. While sleeping by the campfire, Han explains his intentions to Durant, who scoffs, "Personally I refuse to be tied down by anyone."

While Rio Durant flies the Y-45 hauler, Han, Chewie, and Beckett land on the cargo wagon and separate it from the rest of the train following a skirmish with range troopers. Their plan is to use the Y-45 hauler to ferry the stolen cargo weapon. Before Beckett's gang can escape with the stolen coaxium, the group is attacked by the Cloud-Riders, who ride swoop bikes. Two of the Cloud-Riders board the Y-45 hauler and fatally wound Durant. Solo manages to climb aboard the transport hauler and fly the ship, tripping a security sensor as he gains control. With his dying breath, Durant apologizes to Solo for mocking his flying abilities and tells him that Val was right in her belief that no one should die alone.

As the skirmish continues Val, who is stationed on top of a nearby bridge, uses her vantage point to distract and fend off several security viper probe droids. However, the Conveyex is rapidly approaching the bridge and Val realizes that there is not enough time for her to abandon her position without letting the crew steal the coaxium wagon. After telling Beckett of her change of plans via comlink, Val professes her love for him before detonating the bomb, killing herself and destroying the bridge.

The destruction of the bridge causes the Conveyex to plunge into a deep gorge. After a struggle, Chewbacca manages to detach the coaxium wagon from the rest of the train. However, the Cloud-Riders have attached grappling hooks to the wagon, dragging it down. Not wanting to risk the lives of Beckett and Chewbacca, Solo makes the difficult decision to let go of the coaxium wagon; which plunges into the ravine below and explodes.

An audience with Dryden Vos