A royal welcome! Sent to investigate
allegations that Mandalore was joining
Count Dooku's Separatists, Obi-Wan
Kenobi was reunited with an old
friend, the Duchess Satine of Kalevala.
While Satine claimed Mandalore's
intentions were to remain neutral
during the war, an attack on the capital
city led Obi-Wan to the discovery of a
terrorist organization known as
Death Watch.

Now the Duchess travels to the Senate,
so she can plead her case against her
involvement in the war, as the Jedi prepare
a defense against her opponents…
Aboard the Coronet, Obi-Wan and Anakin brief clone troopers on the situation. The clones and the astromech droid R2-D2 are told that the safety of the Duchess Satine Kryze is of the utmost importance. They are also told to search for any suspicious activity aboard the ship that may point to Death Watch or the Separatists. Obi-Wan and Anakin are summoned to meet with the duchess, and Anakin discerns from Obi-Wan's tenseness that he and Satine were once close. Upon arrival, Obi-Wan and Satine discuss the nature of the war; Satine stubbornly wishes to remain neutral despite potential Separatist involvement, but Obi-Wan warns her that may not be an option.

As the Coronet jumps into hyperspace, the clones Redeye and Mixer are attacked by an assassin probe. Rex contacts Obi-Wan when he is unable to find the two clones, and Anakin goes to help them in their search. They discover a cargo crate that is mysteriously open and the contents missing. Anakin updates Obi-Wan, who is dining with Satine and numerous Senators. Anakin and the clones discover the assassin probe and destroy it, but another makes its way up a turbolift towards the dining area. Obi-Wan destroys the second probe, and both parties are then attacked by numerous small probe killer droids which were being stored in the larger ones. The probe killers are destroyed in the following battle, and Anakin later learns from a protocol droid that the box containing the droids was ordered on board by one of the four Senators now aboard the ship; Obi-Wan discovers one assassin droid left alive, and decides to perform an experiment. Holding the droid in a dinner plate, he presents to it each of the four Senators, one at a time. The droid attempts to attack Senators Orn Free Taa, Onaconda Farr, and Kin Robb, but remains calm when near Tal Merrik, the Senator from Kalevala, exposing him as the traitor. Merrik takes Satine hostage, and escapes the room. As Anakin and the clones finish destroying all the assassin droids, Merrik makes his way to the cockpit, where he murders the crew. He pulls the ship out of hyperspace and contacts Pre Vizsla, who sends three boarding ships filled with B2 super battle droids to reinforce Merrik on the Coronet.

As Anakin, Rex, Cody, the clones, and Satine's royal guard hold off the droids, Obi-Wan attempts to arrest Merrik. However, Merrik has rigged the engines of the ship with explosives, and warns Obi-Wan to stay back, or he will detonate the explosives. Satine begs Obi-Wan to stand his ground, and the Jedi follows at a distance as Merrik drags Satine towards one of the boarding ships. Satine confesses to Obi-Wan that she loves him; Obi-Wan admits that he would have left the Jedi Order for her, to which Merrik responds with disgust. Satine manages to escape Merrik's grasp and steal his blaster. Merrik begins to taunt Satine and the Jedi, sneering that neither one of them are brave enough to kill him, as if Satine kills him, she will betray her pacifist views, while if Kenobi kills him, he will lose Satine's respect. Obi-Wan and Satine both hesitate, but before they can act, Anakin runs Merrik through with his lightsaber from behind, killing him.

The Coronet finally arrives on Coruscant, where Palpatine congratulates the Jedi on their work. Satine approaches Obi-Wan and casually flirts with him, remarking with skepticism on his beard (which she says hides too much of his handsome face), and Anakin and Obi-Wan admire Satine as she boards a speeder and departs.