The Resistance, also known as the Rebellion, was a private military force founded by General Leia Organa during the cold war between the New Republic and the First Order. Modeled to an extent on the Alliance to Restore the Republic, which Organa served with in the Galactic Civil War, the Resistance was composed of human and alien members that shared Organa's views on the threat that the First Order posed to the Republic and the galaxy at large. Among the organization's personnel were members of the New Republic military, such as the pilots Poe Dameron and Kazuda Xiono who supported the Resistance in lieu of direct action from the Galactic Senate, while others like Paige and Rose Tico rallied to Organa's cause as a result of the First Order's exploitation of their homeworld. Their organization was small, however, and therefore resources were limited. As such, the Resistance relied on the support of sympathetic senators who discreetly funneled credit, starships, and weapons to Organa's cash-strapped movement.

Though tolerated by the Republic, the galactic government regarded Organa and her followers as extremists that risked open warfare with the First Order—an outcome the Senate wished to avoid even as the Order disregarded the terms of the Galactic Concordance. Organa herself had been sidelined from the political process, her concerns about the Galactic Empire's successor dismissed as paranoid warmongering. Further isolated by the public revelation that the Sith Lord Darth Vader was, in fact, her biological father, Organa struck out on her own to oppose the First Order as founder of the Resistance. A period of hostility ensued between the two organizations characterized by various methods short of open warfare, such as espionage and propaganda. The Resistance also competed against the First Order during the search for the Jedi Master Luke Skywalker, who disappeared into self-imposed exile following his failed attempt to restore the Jedi Order.

The cold war escalated into open conflict when the First Order launched an attack on the New Republic, annihilating the Senate and its capital on Hosnian Prime with the power of Starkiller Base in 34 ABY. In the wake of the Hosnian Cataclysm, the Resistance military launched a direct assault on Starkiller and ultimately destroyed the superweapon. Their victory was short-lived, however. The military forces of the First Order struck back, inflicting heavy losses on the the Resistance which was forced to evacuate their headquarters on D'Qar. The Resistance fleet whittled away under the relentless assault by the First Order Navy. The surviving members of the Resistance sought refuge in an abandoned outpost on Crait, but Supreme Leader Kylo Ren pursued them with the armies of the First Order under his command. The Resistance narrowly survived the Battle of Crait due to the efforts of the Jedi Luke Skywalker, who emerged from his hermitage to save his twin sister's rebellion, although this action would cost Skywalker his life. Nevertheless, his death had invigorated the Resistance, inspiring them to rebuild and continue the war against the First Order.

At the end of the Galactic Civil War, the Galactic Empire suffered their final defeat against the New Republic during the Battle of Jakku. The once-powerful Empire signed a peace treaty with the Republic called the Galactic Concordance, which mandated that they keep the peace with the Republic[9] and remain inside predetermined borders within the Core Worlds and the Inner Rim.[18] After the signing of the treaty, the Imperial starfleet disappeared into the Unknown Regions, where they quietly formed the First Order from the ashes of the Empire. Meanwhile, the Republic carried out the demilitarization of the New Republic Defense Fleet, cutting down on much of its military force in the interest of pursuing peace and preventing a galactic war from ever occurring again. Princess Leia Organa, who had been one of the leaders of the Rebel Alliance during the war, argued strongly against the demilitarization policies and said that the Republic could not trust that the Empire would honor the peace. She urged the Republic to take the threat of the First Order seriously once it arose, but was considered a warmonger.[9]

Leia Organa had formerly been an influential member of the Republic's Senate, but lost almost all credibility with the legislature and was forced to resign following the public revelation of her father having been Darth Vader. Following the Mission to Sibensko, Leia was partially vindicated when she discovered evidence that a paramilitary faction called the Amaxine warriors was colluding with Rinnrivin Di's cartel to overthrow the New Republic. While Leia warned that there were more threats, much of the Senate disagreed, with some accusing her of warmongering. Realizing that the Senate could not protect the New Republic, Leia along with the few remaining allies she could trust, such as Gial Ackbar, C-3PO, Joph Seastriker, and Temmin Wexley, formed a paramilitary outfit called the Resistance.[19]

Fearing an occupation of their independent homeworld, Ryloth, by the First Order during their rise of power, numerous Twi'leks pledged their allegiance to Leia Organa and the Resistance.