TX-20 reveals his plan: to use starved gutkurrs to take out the Republic forces. Back at the Republic camp, Cody has noticed Waxer and Boil's absence, and broadcasts a transmission to contact them. Seeing the Republic troops on the move, TX-20 orders the gutkurrs released. The two clones receive the transmission and, realizing that they are severely late, they try to brainstorm possible excuses. However, the gutkurrs suddenly appear, and the two clones and Numa rush back into the house. Numa shows the clones an escape passage, and they run into the underground tunnels just in time.

Meanwhile, Ghost Company is attacked by the gutkurrs. Obi-Wan uses the Force to lure the creatures into an alley bordered by a bridge. Cody and his men fire at the bridge, and the gutkurrs are trapped, while Obi-Wan leaps out. Though the clones defeat the creature, TX-20 knows that their numbers are very thin. Suddenly, Waxer and Boil emerge from a hatch in the street nearby, with Numa in tow. Obi-Wan converses to Numa in Twi'leki, who agrees to lead them to the prisoners while Cody and his men create a diversion, with Obi-Wan, Waxer and Boil freeing the Twi'lek prisoners. After Obi-Wan frees the prisoners, Numa is reunited with her uncle, Nilim Bril. However, a battle droid reports the rescue attempt, and TX-20 turns his AAT around.

Obi-Wan takes control of a proton cannon, and with the help of Waxer and Boil, he manages to destroy the other cannons. However, a blast from TX-20's tank destroys their cannon and knocks the three to the ground. Numa runs to her clone friends and huddles close to Obi-Wan, even as he tries to push her out of the line of fire. TX-20 targets Obi-Wan and Numa, laughing evilly and gloating that Obi-Wan has lost. Incensed by the threat to Numa, the Twi'leks rush out of hiding, swarm over the tank and tear TX-20 to pieces with their bare hands - a possibility the hyper-intelligent droid has not foreseen, as evidenced by its last words, "does not compute... does not compute...!"

The Acclamator transports land, and Mace Windu commends Obi-Wan on his victory. However, their new objective is much harder: to take the Ryloth capital of Lessu and free this world. Waxer and Boil say goodbye to Numa. As the army heads toward the capital, Numa calls “Nerra!” out to Waxer and Boil again, and Obi-Wan translates: “Nerra” means “brother”. Smiling, Waxer and Boil turn and wave back at Numa, before moving out toward the sun, intent on freeing this world.