Mission to DallenorEdit
"Thank you for coming master Jedi. My name is Clatriffe. I'm in charge of the Dallenor excavation."
―Clatriffe[src]
Master Kenobi was given a mission to go to Dallenor, where an archaeology team had discovered a Jedi Holocron. Kenobi decided to take Skywalker with him as part of his training. Kenobi went to the Temple Archives to find information on Dallenor and about any Jedi that went there to no avail. He told master Yoda that he would take his apprentice with him, to which Yoda surprisingly agreed to allow. Kenobi and Skywalker took a T-6 shuttle to Dallenor.[14]

Upon their arrival at Dallenor, Kenobi met mistress Clatriffe, who told her trouble's with the local pirates. Kenobi was told of Clatriffe's discovery of century-old droids and how she had to hire several of the locals for protection. Kenobi examined the Holocron but did not open it due to the arrival of Hudso Shaku and his Krypder Riders. Kenobi attempted to convince them to leave, but Shaku and the riders wanted the artifacts and Kenobi's lightsaber. Kenobi fought the riders and subdued them. Kenobi then saw that Shaku had taken Skywalker hostage and demanded his lightsaber. Before Obi-Wan could give a reply, Anakin was able to knock Shaku out with rocks.[14]

A couple of years after that, Obi-Wan and Anakin traveled to the planet Ilum so that Skywalker could build his first lightsaber;[6] after its construction, Kenobi said to him "Anakin, this weapon is your life."[20][21] Three years after the Battle of Naboo, Skywalker sought to impress his peers at the Jedi Temple. During a training session, he defeated a training droid, which he had programmed to mimic the appearance of the Sith of Naboo. All the while Mace Windu, Kenobi and Supreme Chancellor Sheev Palpatine watched—the latter of which was impressed.[22] Sometime later, Skywalker struggled to learn the skill of taming creatures when Kenobi told him that the Chancellor wanted to see him. The two arrived at his office, where Palpatine requested that Skywalker accompany him on an errand, declining Kenobi's company.[23]

Upon Skywalker's return to the Jedi Temple, he confided in Kenobi that he wished to leave the Order, feeling uncomfortable at the prospect of his entire life being decided when he was only nine years old, and surrendered his lightsaber to his master. Though Kenobi took the weapon, he pleaded Skywalker to reconsider.[24]

Mission to Carnelion IVEdit
"The road lies before you, Anakin Skywalker. Will you walk it alone?"
"No, Master. As a Jedi. If you'll show me the way."
―Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker

Before Skywalker could give his definite answer, at Yoda's behest, both student and master responded to a mysterious distress signal from the supposedly-dead world of Carnelion IV that specifically called for Jedi intercession. They began their journey to the coordinates, but their shuttle was damaged due to the planet's atmospheric debris field and the two had to eject from the doomed vessel, landing below the Celadon Sea. Not too long afterward, they came to be aware of there being life on the planet as a sky battle raged over them, and Kenobi returned his lightsaber to him so that he could defend himself. As one of the combatant airships began to fall, Skywalker and Kenobi saved its two-person crew by delaying the crash.[22]

The survivors, Kolara and Mother Pran, were unaware of the distress signal and who the Jedi were.[22] Kenobi was then able to use a mind trick on Pran to lower her weapons. However, they came under attack by the other airship. Kenobi then used his lightsaber to destroy the airship. Kenobi then stopped the pilot, Grecker from shooting at Skywalker, Pran, and Kolara. After Skywalker destroyed their blasters, Kenobi then pulled their knives away. Kenobi reasoned with Grecker, Kolara, and Pran that they need to get to safety. As they made their way, they came across Corpse-leeches. Kenobi and Skywalker then drew their lightsabers and tried to use the force to connect with them to no avail. Kenobi and the others then boarded an airship.

Kenobi then refused to accept to give them the location of the distress signal. He also told Grecker that Skywalker was not his son, but his Padawan at the dying request of his master. Kenobi and Grecker then defended the airship against the corpse-leeches. However, Pran and Kolara took Skywalker with them and abandoned the airship. Kenobi was then left behind on the airship as Pran destroyed it.[25]

Kenobi and Grecker were then able to jump off the airship before it crashed. Kenobi was then able to use the force to make the creatures understand him. Kenobi then asked Grecker to tell him where Skywalker was taken to. Grecker told him that he did not know where the open was. Kenobi then decided to go after him with Grecker after getting air masks on. Kenobi and Grecker then found the location of the distress signal. They then came under attack by a creature. Grecker then fired a flare. Kenobi and Grecker then fought until a masked man came out and let them in. Kenobi was able to get inside before Grecker closed the door. The man, Sera, then showed Kenobi his collection of his world's remnants. Kenobi was then told that Sera was the one who sent the distress signal. He then told Kenobi about his collection of relics and how both the open and closed wanted him dead.[24]

Kenobi then learned about how Sera sent the signal and learned about both the Jedi and Sith. Kenobi and Sera then went to the roof to watch as Grecker's forces attacked his fortress. Despite Sera's pleas for Kenobi to kill them, Kenobi told her that the Jedi spare everyone. Kenobi then spoke with Grecker and convinced him to stop their attack. However, Mother Pran attacked with her machines. Kenobi was then saved by Skywalker. Kenobi then took Skywalker to the Sera's communication unit. There, Skywalker was able to send out a signal off-planet. Republic and Jedi forces arrived where they ended the conflict.[26]

Mission to Glee AnselmEdit
"Master Yoda has been kidnapped from the Jedi Temple!"
―Anakin Skywalker[src]
Grand Master Yoda was captured by battle droids and taken to the planet Glee Anselm. Kenobi and Skywalker were sent to rescue him. Whilst on Glee Anselm, they fell into a pit trap build by native Anselmi. The Anselmi was going to kill them to please their ancestors but Skywalker using the Force to jump from the pit to hover over them. They all became terrified and ran away.