Aboard an Acclamator-class transgalactic military assault ship, Mace Windu tells Obi-Wan Kenobi as he boards the Crumb Bomber that when he takes the city of Nabat they'll have their landing zone for the ground assault forces. However, Wat Tambor anticipates this, and Tactical droid commander TX-20 readies his five proton cannons, while using captive Twi'leks as a “living shield” to further protect them, estimating that the Jedi will not risk a heavy attack.

Obi-Wan and Clone Commander Cody brief Ghost Company on their mission, and while they must retake the city, they cannot destroy the Twi'leks' home, and are allowed to use only blasters and droid poppers. Above, the Acclamator assault ships are attacked by the proton cannons below. Commander Ponds states to Windu that the fire is penetrating their shield. Windu tasks Obi-Wan with taking the cannons out so that the larger transports can land. The Crumb Bomber lands with the other gunships, and Obi-Wan and Ghost Company move towards Nabat. Droid gunners on the outskirts of Nabat pin down Ghost Company. Obi-wan and two troopers, Waxer and Boil, utilize droid poppers to take out the droids in the bunkers.

After losing contact with the droids on the village's outer perimeter, TX-20 sends two recon droids to find out the Jedi's plan, while Obi-Wan dispatches Cody, Wooley, Waxer and Boil to scout ahead. Waxer and Boil head south, while Cody and Wooley go to the courtyard. The latter discover the Twi'leks being held hostage in the cannons' immediate vicinity. Obi-Wan, speaking to Windu via hologram, explains that the hostages will make the mission difficult but not impossible and hits upon a plan to disable the guns without letting the hostages come into any danger. Unfortunately, a recon droid broadcasts their conference to TX-20, who recognizes Kenobi and begins researching his opponent, finding the Jedi is known for deceptive movements.

Waxer and Boil stumble across the young Twi'lek orphan Numa, who at first is fearful of them. After they remove their helmets, Numa relaxes a bit; she calls them both “Nerra”, and takes a ration bar that they give her. Waxer and Boil move out to finish their scouting, Waxer doing so reluctantly, but Numa follows the two clones. Waxer is still worried about her, while Boil tries to keep him focused on the mission. Numa somehow gets ahead of them and leads her to a shattered building that was once her home. Waxer and Boil, moved by the losses the war has inflicted upon the child, take it upon themselves to keep her safe.