Padmé Amidala, also known as Padmé Amidala Naberrie, was a human female senator who represented the people of Naboo during the final years of the Galactic Republic. Prior to her career in the Galactic Senate, Amidala was the elected ruler of the Royal House of Naboo. A political idealist, she advocated for the preservation of democracy as well as a peaceful resolution to the Clone Wars. However, her secret marriage to the Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker would have a lasting effect on the future of the galaxy for decades to come.

Born in 46 BBY during the Age of the Republic, Padmé Naberrie was raised by her parents, Ruwee Naberrie and his wife Jobal, on the peaceful Mid Rim world of Naboo. Despite the humble background of the Naberrie family, Padmé was identified early for her potential in public service. Devoting her life to civic duty, she was elected queen and, therefore, adopted the regal name "Amidala" in 32 BBY. Due to the machinations of her advisor, Senator Sheev Palpatine, Amidala's reign was put to the test by the Trade Federation's blockade and subsequent invasion of Naboo. Unable to fight the Federation's army of battle droids without assistance, the queen beseeched the Galactic Senate on Coruscant for help, only to see her efforts hampered by bureaucracy and procedure. Although she ultimately liberated her homeworld with the help of the Jedi Order and the Gungan Grand Army, her decision to cast a Vote of No Confidence against Finis Valorum enabled Palpatine to become the Supreme Chancellor.

Following her reign, Amidala joined the Senate and struggled to resolve the Separatist Crisis through diplomacy, becoming a leading voice in the Loyalist Committee by 22 BBY. After surviving an assassination attempt, she was removed from the capital and sent back to Naboo under the protection of Padawan Anakin Skywalker. Though the Jedi Code forbade personal relationships, deeming attachment and possession unbecoming of a Jedi, the two gradually became closer as their feelings for each other grew. In the aftermath of the Battle of Geonosis, Amidala secretly married her Jedi protector despite her own reservations about their relationship and the consequences they would face if the truth ever came to light. Their subsequent interactions were limited throughout the Clone Wars, with Amidala continuing to advocate peaceful solutions in the Senate while Skywalker served on the frontlines as a Jedi General in the Grand Army of the Republic. In the waning months of the pan-galactic conflict, Amidala revealed to her husband that she was pregnant. As a result of Skywalker's fear of loss, he was seduced by the dark side of the Force, believing that by becoming a Sith Lord he would gain the power to prevent his wife from dying in childbirth. Amidala, who learned of her husband's transformation into a Sith, ultimately died of a broken heart after giving birth to the twins Luke Skywalker and Leia Amidala Skywalker. With her dying breath, she claimed that there was still good in the former Anakin Skywalker, who embraced the persona of Darth Vader throughout the reign of the Galactic Empire.

Amidala's children played a major role in the fragmentation of the Empire and the redemption of her husband. Like her mother, Leia entered public service and became a flag-bearer for the democratic ideals of liberty and justice as a leader in the Alliance to Restore the Republic and its successor, the New Republic, before becoming the founding general of the Resistance against the First Order—a successor state to the Galactic Empire. Luke, on the other hand, was trained in the ways of the Jedi like his father before him and was a celebrated war hero of the Rebel Alliance. Through Luke's efforts to redeem his father back to the light, Amidala's last words proved true when Anakin killed the Emperor during the Battle of Endor.

A human female of the Naberrie family, the woman best remembered as Amidala was born Padmé Naberrie on the bountiful planet of Naboo in 46 BBY.[2] She was the younger daughter of Ruwee and Jobal Naberrie[11] and the sister of Sola Naberrie.[12] Her father, Ruwee Naberrie, was a friend of Senator Onaconda Farr, who represented the solar system of Rodia in the Senate of the Galactic Republic. Amidala was very fond of the Rodian, whom she referred to as "Uncle Ono."[13] When Amidala was seven, she traveled with her father to Shadda-Bi-Boran to help relocate the population in the wake of an ecological disaster. The effort resulted in failure as the population could not adapt to their new homeworld. It led Amidala later in life to declare that she would try 10,000 times in order to save one person.[12]

Rise to queenshipEdit
"I wasn't the youngest Queen ever elected. But now that I think back on it, I'm not sure I was old enough. I'm not sure I was ready."
―Padmé Amidala[src]
Although her parents were of modest origins, Naberrie was identified as a gifted and brilliant young girl at an early age. As a child, she devoted herself to public service,[2] joining the Apprentice Legislators at the tender age of eight, and she eventually became a junior senatorial adviser.[7] At age twelve, Naberrie participated in the Legislative Youth Program, in which she met a slightly older boy named Palo Jemabie. The two fell in love, but their relationship did not last, as they parted ways when Palo left politics and chose to become an artist.[8] At the same age, she started a two-year mandate as supervisor of Theed, the capital city of Naboo.[7]

Two years later, Padmé Naberrie was elected Queen of Naboo, and she adopted Amidala as her name of office.[2] When in danger, Amidala would disguise herself as one of her staff of five loyal handmaidens and would introduce herself as "Padmé" while her decoy Sabé assumed the persona of Queen Amidala.[7] Although she was not the youngest sovereign ever elected, she would later question her own maturity at the time of her election.[8]

The Invasion of NabooEdit
"I was not elected to watch my people suffer and die while you discuss this invasion in a committee!"
―Queen Amidala, to the Galactic Senate — Gnome-speakernotesListen (file info)[src]
Shortly after her election, the young queen was faced with a major crisis when the Trade Federation decided to lay siege to her home planet. The Federation's devious leader, Viceroy Nute Gunray, intended to force her to sign a treaty that would legitimize the invasion in the eyes of the Galactic Republic. However, Amidala refused to submit to the Federation. The Viceroy then sent her to Camp Four. However, Amidala was rescued in the eleventh hour by two Jedi, Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi. The two had been charged with negotiating a truce with the Trade Federation, but Gunray had tried to kill them as soon as they had arrived. The Jedi freed Amidala and her entourage from the clutches of the Federation's battle droids, and the group fled the blockaded Naboo aboard the queen's royal starship.[1]

However, the royal starship was damaged in combat while trying to break through the blockade of battleships the Federation had deployed around the Naboo star system. The hyperdrive generator needed to be repaired, which prompted the crew to make an emergency landing on Tatooine. The queen, who was curious about the desert world, disguised as one of her handmaidens—using her birth name of Padmé Naberrie—so she could accompany the Jedi on the planet's surface. Amidala recognized that she had not fooled Master Qui-Gon for a moment, but he went along with her story which allowed her to continue fooling everyone else.[12] With her companions, Amidala ventured into the spaceport of Mos Espa, which Qui-Gon Jinn described as a haven for "those who do not wish to be found." While trying to negotiate for spare parts with the junk dealer Watto, the party met Anakin Skywalker, a nine-year-old human slave. The boy was immediately fascinated by Amidala's aura of beauty, asking her whether she was an angel from the moons of Iego. In turn, the queen thought the boy was a bit odd, yet charming.[1]

Since the Jedi and the queen could not raise the money needed to purchase the repair parts for the royal ship, Skywalker offered to compete in the incoming Boonta Eve Classic Podrace so he could earn the required funds for them. Master Jinn promptly accepted the offer, but Amidala criticized his actions; although she did like Skywalker, she thought it was unwise to place the fate of Naboo in the hands of a nine-year-old boy. However, Skywalker managed to win the race, beating the reigning champion Sebulba against all odds, and Amidala joined the scenes of jubilation that followed the boy's victory in the Grand Arena of Mos Espa. Thanks to a bargain Qui-Gon Jinn had made with Watto, Skywalker was now freed from slavery and allowed to accompany the Jedi in their travel. On the way to the galactic capital of Coruscant, Amidala, still in the guise of the handmaiden Padmé, helped Skywalker cope with the loss of his mother Shmi, whom Watto had refused to let go.[1]

The fight for TheedEdit
"Now, Viceroy, we will discuss a new treaty!"
―Queen Amidala after capturing Nute Gunray — Gnome-speakernotesListen (file info)[src]
Once the group arrived on Coruscant, Amidala resumed her role as queen. In preparation for her public appearance before the Republic Senate, she met with Sheev Palpatine, who represented the Naboo system in that governing body. While she wished to plead for the Senate to rescue her homeworld, Palpatine informed her that the assembly was too corrupt to care about their situation. The senator then encouraged Amidala to move for a Vote of No Confidence in the leadership of Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum, ruler of the Republic. Valorum was a well-meaning politician, and the queen initially refused to move against him. However, upon witnessing the problems of politics during the Senate session in which she pleaded, Amidala ended up following Palpatine's advice, asking for Valorum's ousting from office. An election was decided, and Palpatine himself emerged as a likely candidate to succeed the disgraced Valorum. Although the senator asked to stay on Coruscant until the end of the elective process, Amidala decided to return to Naboo, intent on retaking her world without the Senate's help.[1]

