After boarding the Millennium Falcon, Solo and his companions flee into space just as an Imperial Star Destroyer exits hyperspace. Seeking to recover the Falcon's stolen coaxium cargo, the Star Destroyer dispatched several TIE fighters and heavy fighters in pursuit of the freighter. Due to the highly volatile nature of the unrefined coaxium, Solo's companions estimate that completion of the Kessel run is impossible before the fuel detonates - the conventional route having never been done in less than twenty parsecs. With the help of L3's navigational computer which has been hardwired into the Falcon's systems, Han attempts to both lose their Imperial pursuers and cut the flight distance by flying out of the safer eddies and into the dangerous storm clouds of the Akkadese Maelstrom, leading to the Maw Cluster.

Han's prodigious piloting skills allow them to evade their Imperial pursuers, only to awaken a massive summa-verminoth inside the Maw Cluster. The crew tries to escape the monster, but end up arriving at a large gravity well. Thinking fast, Han ejects the Falcon's escape pod into the well for the summa-verminoth to follow, which is instantly sucked in. The Falcon then escapes the gravity well after Beckett boosts the ship's fusion core with a drop of coaxium, which briefly supercharges the engines. Solo's quick thinking reduces the typical distance from over twenty to just twelve parsecs (with some generous rounding).

Confronting the Cloud-Riders

After making the Kessel Run, Solo and his companions land on the planet Savareen to rendezvous with Vos. While the team are unloading their coaxium cargo at Bis Refinery, Solo and his companions are surrounded by Enfys Nest and her Cloud-Riders. Solo attempts to intimidate the Cloud-Riders by claiming to have a complement of armed mercenaries aboard the Millennium Falcon. However, Lando, who is grieving over the loss of L-3 and is furious at the damage to his ship, abandons Solo and the others.

At that point, Enfys Nest removes her mask and reveals that she and the Cloud-Riders are not pirates but are rebels trying to stop crime lords and the Empire from gaining more power. She tells Solo and his companions that the Cloud-Riders need the coaxium for their rebel cause. Sympathetic to the Cloud-Riders' cause and plight, Solo hatches a plan to prevent the coaxium from falling into the hands of Vos and the Crimson Dawn.

Skirmish on SavareenEdit
Beckett decides to leave before Vos lands. When Vos lands on his yacht First Light, Han along with Qi'ra and Chewbacca go to deliver the purportedly "fake" coaxium canisters to the Crimson Dawn crime lord. Vos asks about Beckett and Han tells him that he didn't make it. Aboard the First Light, Vos surprises Solo's team by announcing that the coaxium is fake—he reveals that his "inside man" Beckett informed him of Han's plan to sell the real shipment to the Cloud-Riders. Vos also chastises Qi'ra for betraying him and realizes that Solo was her weakness.

However, Han announces that he had anticipated Beckett's deception: the coaxium containers they have brought are real. Meanwhile, Crimson Dawn enforcers storm the Bis Refinery and capture the masked "Cloud-Riders." However, they quickly discover that the coaxium containers are empty and that the "Cloud-Riders" are villagers serving as decoys. The real Cloud-Riders soon emerge from hiding and defeat Vos' enforcers.

Back aboard the First Light, Beckett takes Chewbacca hostage and escapes with the coaxium containers. A gunfight between Han and Vos breaks out. Qi'ra intervenes, holding Solo at sword point. However, Qi'ra's feelings for Solo leads her to side with him. She duels with her boss Vos and kills him. Following Vos' death, Qi'ra urges Han to help the Cloud-Riders and promises that she will join him shortly. After Han leaves, Qi'ra seals the room.

Separate paths

Han catches up with Beckett and Chewbacca. Before Beckett can shoot, Han shoots him first, killing the gangster. In his final moments, Beckett compliments Han for his quick thinking. With the deaths of Vos and Beckett, Han and Chewbacca deliver the refined coaxium to Nest, who reveals her plans to use the coaxium to aid the rebellion against the Empire. She offers Han the chance to join her but he declines. In response, Nest states that some day he may feel more sympathetic to the rebels' cause. Out of gratitude for his help, Nest gives Solo a vial of coaxium, enough to buy a ship for himself.

Alone aboard Vos' yacht, Qi'ra contacts Vos' superior, who is revealed to be the former Sith apprentice Maul. She informs him of the coaxium mission's failure and assumes Vos' position but carefully avoids telling him about Han's involvement, instead pinning the blame on Beckett. Maul orders Qi'ra to bring the yacht to the planet Dathomir and tells her that she will be working more closely with him in the future. Having given a friend Solo a clean break from his debts to Crimson Dawn, Qi'ra departs on the yacht.

Rematch with Lando CalrissianEdit
"You really have it bad for the Falcon, don't ya?"
"It's mutual. Trust me, she belongs with me."
―Lando Calrissian and Han Solo