"I am committed to the idea of a galaxy ruled by an enlightened leader, with laws that apply universally—not one set for the Core Worlds, another for the Outer Rim worlds."
"An autocracy, guided by the count of Serenno."
"I am ambitious, but not to that degree."
―Count Dooku and Governor Wilhuff Tarkin of Eriadu, during their final dinner together before the onset of the Clone Wars.[src]

The first declaration of secession can be traced back to Count Dooku's Raxus Address, when the count denounced the Galactic Republic as a futile enterprise that was hopelessly burdened by corruption and favoritism toward the Core Worlds. Following the address, Dooku founded the Confederacy of Independent Systems and began the Separatist Crisis,[2] to do this he had commandeering a HoloNet relay station in the Raxus system, after which some believed he was merely one step ahead of Republic assassins. The fallen Jedi Master's words of inflammatory rhetoric would find receptive audiences among young intellectuals in Mid and Inner Rim universities. Both charismatic and exuding confidence, Dooku's message rallied thousands of individuals by recounting decades of experience within the Republic government and publicizing its hypocrisies, corruption and ineffectiveness. Dooku's rebellious message mesmerized young psyches and spurred them into political activism. As the galactic crisis grew more and more heated, Dooku's appearances grew rarer and were announced with much shorter notice, with his message often spurning violence on polarized worlds. Thousands of disgruntled star systems ultimately seceded from the Republic and fully embraced the newly created Confederacy of Independent Systems fiery message of resistance. The idea that the Republic was distant, dispassionate, corrupt, and unworthy of membership ultimately marshaled disgruntled systems into a new galactic government. The agrarian world of Ukio found itself questioning what value it reciprocated for being the breadbasket of the Core Worlds, and after citing a litany of neglect, senatorial representatives of the Abrion sector tendered their articles of secession along with other worlds in the galaxy's hinterlands. The Confederacy also sought to gain prosperous Outer Rim world of Eriadu. With its location at the confluence of the Hydian Way and Rimma Trade Route, Dooku needed Eriadu's allegiance to control the Greater Seswenna and effectively collapse the core back onto itself, undoing millennia of galactic exploration, conquest and colonization. After negotiations and attending dinners with Eriadu's then Governor Wilhuff Tarkin, the attempt to claim Eriadu's loyalty would fail, as Tarkin refused, beveling that an ineffective yet unified galaxy was better than a fractured one
As the crisis intensified as more systems pledged loyalty to the Dooku separatist government across the galaxy leading to uncertainty and fears that the Republic would be split into two, the Galactic Senate of the Republic moved towards the passage of the Military Creation Act, which would establish centralized armed forces to protect the thousand-year-old democracy for the first time. Meanwhile, Dooku had promised the Viceroy Nute Gunray that he would assassinate Senator Padmé Amidala of Naboo if he signed Dooku's treaty. The viceroy accepted the offer and Dooku dispatched Jango Fett to carry out Amidala's assassination. Despite the failure of Fett's mission, Dooku was able to have the Trade Federation, the InterGalactic Banking Clan, the Techno Union, the Commerce Guild and the Corporate Alliance all sign a treaty on Geonosis and joined together as the Separatist Council. After pursuing Fett to Geonosis, Kenobi discovered Dooku's plot and also learned that it was Gunray who ordered the assassination of Amidala. He was captured shortly thereafter and imprisoned by Dooku, but not before sending a message to the Jedi Council relating what he had discovered. Meanwhile tensions between the Republic and Separatist movement peaked after the Republic learned of the size and significance of its army of battle droids, motivating the Senate to grant emergency powers to the Supreme Chancellor of the Republic—a position that was then occupied by Sheev Palpatine, the alter ego of Darth Sidious.[1][10]

During the attempted execution of Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker, and Senator Padmé Amidala, a team of two hundred Jedi were sent to the arena to rescue the trio. The Jedi were attacked by a host of battle droids during the attempt and were corralled into the arena. With the battle turning against the Jedi, Dooku gave the remaining Jedi forces a chance to lay down their arms, a choice which Mace Windu declined. In the next few moments, several Acclamator-class assault ships arrived over the arena and engaged droid forces on the planet's surface, starting the deadly three-year Clone Wars.[1]

The Clone WarsEdit
Blue Glass Arrow Main article: Clone Wars
"I have good news for you, my Lord. The war has begun."
"Excellent. Everything is going as planned."
―Darth Tyranus and Darth Sidious — Gnome-speakernotesListen (file info)[src]
War on GeonosisEdit
"The Jedi have amassed a huge army!"
"That doesn't seem possible. How could the Jedi come up with an army so quickly? "
"We must send all available droids into battle!"
"There are too many."
―Nute Gunray and Count Dooku[src]

The arrival of the clones sparked a full-scale battle on Geonosis, with both sides taking heavy losses. Eventually however, the clone army began to gain the upper hand. This forced Poggle to order his soldiers to retreat and hide, but before he joined them, he turned over plans to the Ultimate Weapon — a secret project he had been contracted to build by the Separatists — to Count Dooku. As the battle raged on, Kenobi and Skywalker caught up to Dooku and tried to prevent his escape by engaging in a lightsaber duel, however they were defeated by Dooku with relative ease. Grand Master Yoda came to their rescue and engaged Dooku in a lightsaber battle. After realizing that he was outmatched by Yoda, Dooku fled Geonosis and the Separatist leadership retreated. Though they had suffered a defeat in battle, the goal of the Sith had been fulfilled; the Clone Wars had begun.[1] Shortly the CIS retreat and vacated its first capital world of Geonosis,[14] the Separatists began to seize control of the major hyperspace lanes, separating the Republic from its army.[15]

With the outbreak of hostilities, many worlds either declared openly for the Separatists or declared neutrality, declining to support either side. Some of the neutral worlds banded together into a loose alliance, The Council of Neutral Systems, for mutual negotiation and defense; this was officially merely an advisory group, not a breakaway government. Both sides negotiated with the neutral worlds, with the Republic trying to bring worlds back into the fold willingly if they had not declared for the Separatists due to fears that taking action against ostensibly non-hostile worlds would only increase sympathy for the separatist cause.[15]

Year one (22 BBY–21 BBY)Edit
"Your technology will not save you, and your friends on the planet below shall perish as a result of your failure."
―Admiral Trench, in a message to his Republic opponents during the Battle of Christophsis.[src]
Battle of Christophsis 2
Armored Assault Tanks advance through Crystal City on Christophsis

The war proceeded on many fronts. A force led by Asajj Ventress and General Whorm Loathsom succeeded in capturing Christophsis, but were soon overwhelmed by the small relief force led by Senator Bail Organa.[16] Later on Teth, the Separatists hatched a plot to deny the Jedi the alliance with the Hutt Clan that they so desperately needed and to establish an alliance with the Hutts themselves. Republic forces attempted to save Rotta, the infant son of crime lord Jabba the Hutt, from the Confederacy, who planned to kill the Huttlet and lay the blame on the Jedi Order. However, Jedi General Anakin Skywalker and his Padawan, Ahsoka Tano, effected a rescue of the Huttlet from Teth and return him to Tatooine, thus gaining the support of the Hutts for the Republic.[15]

After the annihilation of the Republic garrison, Ryloth was occupied and blockaded by the Separatist Droid Army. The army was led by Emir Wat Tambor who oversaw the occupation from the city of Lessu. During the occupation, much of Ryloth was pillaged by the droid army on orders from the Emir. The Confederacy forces were repeatedly attacked by a group of Twi'lek freedom fighters led by Cham Syndulla, but suffered minimal losses. Eventually, the Republic Army assembled a force to liberate the planet, a goal they accomplished after heavy fighting. The Republic captured Tambor but his tactical droid escaped with many of the valuables he had looted from the Twi'leks.[17][18]

In order to gain much needed support for their attempt at taking over Mandalore, the Death Watch briefly allied themselves with the Confederacy of Independent Systems. Mandalorian commandos performed sabotage missions for the Separatists against Republic targets. One such mission involved a commando attempting to sabotage a Republic cruiser; the Death Watch commando was captured, but rather than surrender and submit to questioning, he committed suicide.[26] His actions, in addition to false rumors, led many in the republic to believe that Duchess Satine Kryze, the leader of the New Mandalorian government and head of the Council of Neutral Systems, was training a Mandalorian army for the Separatists. The Jedi Council dispatched Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi to Mandalore to meet with Satine and investigate the rumors. At first, the Duchess and her advisers discounted any Mandalorian involvement until Kenobi showed holographic recordings of the Death Watch saboteur. Having no other choice, she reluctantly revealed rumors of the Death Watch's return. The rumors were later proven when a Death Watch commando bombed the memorial shrine in the New Mandalorian capital of Sundari before committing suicide when Kenobi attempted to apprehend him. Left at the bomb site was a holographic representation of the Death Watch symbol, further highlighting the group's return. During these events the leader of death watch—Pre Vizsla—communicated with Count Dooku who revealed his strategy. He would force the Republic into sending peacekeeping forces to Mandalore. Dooku hoped this would lead the populace to view the Republic as invaders and turn to Death Watch to liberate them.[27] When Satine journeyed to Coruscant, Death Watch made a second attempt on her life. Mandalore's senator, Tal Merrik, was secretly in league with the Death Watch, and used his senatorial stamp to smuggle several assassin probes aboard the duchess' ship. This attempt failed, and once Satine safely arrived at the galactic capital, the Death Watch reoccupied their base on Concordia as a staging area for their impending invasion of Mandalore. A New Mandalorian scout reported this development to Prime Minster Almec; however, the Prime Minister wasn't concerned because he believed that the Death Watch would never be able to take Mandalore without the support of the public. Meanwhile, the Republic Senate had decided to send peacekeeping forces to Mandalore after being shown forged evidence of a senior Mandalorian minister begging the Republic to send help. With the help of Kenobi, the Duchess was able to uncover the unedited version of the holorecording. After being shown the new evidence, the Republic Senate revoked its order to send peacekeepers to Mandalore. This shut down Death Watch's plans, and they cancelled the planned attack on Mandalore and broke all ties with the Separatists.