Pantora in peril! The newly elected
Chairman of Pantora, Baron Papanoida,
is caught in a deadly political game.
The Trade Federation has blockaded
Pantora and suspended all commerce
with the system. Isolated from the
rest of the Republic, the people of
Pantora are beginning to rally
against the Senate, who have seemed
unsympathetic to their plight.

To make matters worse, Count Dooku
has come forward offering aid if
Pantora joins the Separatist Alliance.
Chairman Papanoida has dispatched
Senator Chuchi to Coruscant with the
hope that she can motivate the Senate
to act in favor of Pantora before
Lott Dod can legitimize the
blockade....
The Trade Federation is blockading the space above Pantora under the pretense that Pantora has outstanding debts to pay, while Count Dooku is really trying to coerce the Pantorans to join the Separatist Alliance. Senator Riyo Chuchi and Chairman Papanoida are trying to maintain the fighting spirit of their people and turn to the Senate for help. They do gain general sympathy for their plight, but the same night, Papanoida's daughters, Chi Eekway and Che Amanwe, are kidnapped from their quarters, though Che manages to strike one of their attackers with an icon before she is stunned.

The next morning, Ahsoka, who has become a close friend of Chuchi, informs Anakin Skywalker and Senator Amidala of the situation. While the Jedi can't officially get involved in the investigation, Anakin slyly grants his Padawan permission to look into the matter due to "personal" concerns. While Ahsoka and Chuchi travel to the blockade fleet in order to look for the sisters there, Papanoida and his son Ion discover the misplaced icon, smeared with blood, at the crime scene. By analyzing it, they identify one of the kidnappers as Greedo and proceed to Tatooine, where the villain is known to operate. They enter Jabba the Hutt's palace, where Papanoida cunningly spreads word that he wants to hire Greedo's services in order to have him come to them. Greedo does indeed come, with his accomplices and blasters in hand, but Papanoida overpowers him and presents his evidence to Jabba. Exposed, Greedo confesses and leads Papanoida and Ion to a seedy bar in Mos Eisley, where Chi is kept hidden. When Chi is brought forth and identifies her father, a firefight breaks out. Though Papanoida and his children manage to kill all antagonists, Greedo manages to slip away.

In the meantime, Chuchi and Ahsoka, the latter disguised as a servant, are admitted aboard the Trade Federation ship and quartered for the impending negotiation sessions. The same night, the two young women sneak to the Trade Federation ambassador's office, where they overhear him and Administrator Sib Canay talking about one of Papanoida's daughters being kept aboard this ship. A gasp from Chuchi nearly gives them away, but they narrowly avoid discovery thanks to Ahsoka's Jedi abilities. They penetrate the ship's detention complex and find Che in one of the cells, but are discovered. Ahsoka manages to slice up the squad of super battle droids sent against them, and Chuchi uses her glib tongue to force the Trade Federation envoy to reconsider, leading to the dissolution of the blockade and a happy ending for the Papanoidas - and Pantora.