Jedi trapped on Felucia! Clones are
surrounded by droid forces. Their
only hope is to escape on Republic
gunships waiting to land on the
embattled surface. Jedi cruisers have
managed to blow a hole in the droid
defenses, and have sent gunships to
the rescue.
Jedi cruisers arrive to evacuate the planet. Republic gunships, escorted by a fighter squadron commanded by Jedi Master Plo Koon break through the Separatist blockade surrounding Felucia to evacuate Anakin, Obi-Wan, Ahsoka and their troops. The former are outnumbered, with droids closing in on them. However, Ahsoka is elsewhere, sending a pack of droids running. Anakin shouts to his Padawan through the comlink that the group she is chasing are regrouping with the main force and orders her to retreat; Ahsoka is in disbelief that her Master is telling her to run and is insistent on continuing; Anakin brings his gunship in front of her and orders her and her troops to get on.

Later, at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant, Anakin and Ahsoka are before the Council for the latter's lack of foresight. The Council sends Ahsoka to the Jedi Archives for guard duty, under Madame Jocasta Nu's eye. Jocasta tells Ahsoka that she has a specific duty to defend the Holocron Vault, where the Order keeps their collection of holocrons; only Council members are allowed in.

Elsewhere on Coruscant, Cad Bane is contacted by Darth Sidious, who hires him to steal a holocron from the Temple; Bane considers it suicide, as the Temple is well guarded; Sidious assures him that he will ensure that he will gain entrance; Bane demands in return a stealth ship with elite weapons, cloaking device and triple his usual pay. He then places a device in his helper droid, Todo 360, under the pretense of fixing a system crash. Also Bane installs a security chip into Todo, giving him access to all the temple security measures. His partner, Cato Parasitti, a Clawdite bounty hunter, then arrives. Bane tells her to take the form of Jedi Master Ord Enisence, whose corpse is in his room, to help him gain access to the vault.

At the Temple, during a briefing, Yoda senses a shift in the Force and determines that thieves will arrive at the Temple. Anakin and Obi-Wan inaccurately deduces that their enemies are after their transmission codes and go to secure their location. Meanwhile, Cato infiltrates the Temple as Ord. However, he/she is barred by Ahsoka, who asks if he/she needs help; Cato tries waving her off but the Padawan's pestering results in him/her snapping at her. He/she then gains access to the Temple's schematics, telling Bane and Todo where to get in. They get through the shielding and the fans, before coming up upon a laser grid. Anakin and Obi-Wan quickly catch on when the sensors begins a blackout.