Separatist attack! After the destruction
of the Republic outpost on the Rishi Moon,
General Grievous and Asajj Ventress plan
an attack on the planet Kamino, home of
the cloning factories.

Meanwhile, aboard a Jedi cruiser, Jedi
Knights Anakin Skywalker and Obi-Wan
Kenobi examine an intercepted message
from General Grievous....
Forewarned by the destruction of Rishi Station earlier in the Clone Wars, and a new intercepted transmission between Asajj Ventress and General Grievous, Anakin Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi travel to Kamino to warn Shaak Ti and Lama Su of an upcoming Separatist attack, with clone troopers Captain Rex, Commander Cody, Broadside, Echo, and Fives of the 501st Legion in their company. While Echo and Fives are walking down a hallway full of young clone cadets, remembering their own time as cadets, they run into 99. 99 welcomes them back, but is saddened to hear that Hevy, who gave him his medal, has not made it.

Shortly, a Separatist fleet arrives and a space battle ensues. Anakin leads the Republic space forces against the attackers, scoring several serious hits against the enemy - or so it seems. Suspicious, Obi-Wan travels underwater, where he discovers that the pieces of debris falling into the Kaminoan ocean are actually components for attack craft being assembled by aqua droids. The droids discover and attack him, and he barely manages to get away astride an aiwha.

The finished attack craft begin to assault Tipoca City, breaking through the walls and depositing their droid load inside, along with Grievous and Ventress. After a bit of bickering about which one of them is superior to the other, the two leaders proceed to attack two key targets: Grievous is to attack the barracks to kill all the clones he can find there. After a short battle Colt is the only clone guarding the DNA chamber. Before he can fight Ventress force chokes him and impaled him with her lightsaber. Ventress heads for the main DNA storage to secure the prime DNA sample of the clones' template, Jango Fett. However, Obi-Wan has managed to get back and recall Anakin to the city; while Obi-Wan faces off against Grievous, Anakin engages Ventress in combat. Grievous escapes when a Trident unit crushes the platform they are on; Obi-Wan seemingly falls to his death, but is saved again by the aiwha. With the aid of a clone trooper platoon, Anakin secures the DNA sample from Ventress, but she manages to hop onto Grievous' escape pod and get away.

Meanwhile, Fives and Echo destroy attacking Aqua Droids from a sniping position, where they are soon joined by 99 bringing them ammunition and a group of lost youngsters. They retreat into the barracks, where Cody and Rex also appear. Although their chances do not look good, Fives and Echo succeed in raising the morale of the young cadets, and 99 shows them the way to a nearby armory, where they re-equip themselves. A platoon of battle droids soon attack the barracks, and by having the cadets strike from ambush, the troopers succeed in destroying all of their attackers, but 99 is killed as he tries to get more ammunition for his brothers. After the battle, Cody, Rex, Echo, and Fives mourn 99's death, and honor him as a true soldier. Soon afterward, both Echo and Fives are promoted to ARC troopers for their initiative and bravery.

