"The Galactic Republic was the Republic of legend, greater than distance or time. Tales of its founding have been occluded by the haze of intervening millennia, and its rebirth a thousand years ago was regarded as the latest evolution in an unending cycle. Like the greatest of trees, however, the Republic's decline began from within, with a deep rot that was not apparent until it was too late."
―Janyor[src]
The Galactic Republic, commonly known as the Republic and remembered as the Old Republic, was a federal parliamentary republic comprising thousands of worlds spread across the galaxy. Adhering to a democratic constitution, the Republic was governed by a legislative body of two thousand senators, known as the Galactic Senate, appointed to represent the interests of their respective homeworlds on the galactic stage. It was led by the Supreme Chancellor, who was chosen from among the Senate's ranks to arbitrate congressional sessions and represent the Republic as a whole. Coruscant, a planetary ecumenopolis located in the Core Worlds, was the Republic's capital, and therefore, where the Senate was headquartered.

The modern Republic emerged a thousand years before the advent of the Clone Wars in 22 BBY. A new era of peace dawned across the galaxy in the aftermath of the last war between the ancient Sith Lords and Jedi Knights, sweeping away centuries of darkness lumped into a collective whole known as the "Old Republic" and ultimately forgotten when history began anew. At the height of its power, art and commerce flourished across the Republic while isolated conflicts remained few and far between, the result of the Jedi Order's mandate as guardians of peace and justice. Using propaganda to cultivate a sense of civic duty and manifest destiny, the Republic embraced a policy of expansion, determined to see its banner spread from the Core Worlds to the Outer Rim Territories. During the Fall of the Republic, which began with the Invasion of Naboo in 32 BBY, its principles had been eroded by corrupt politics and the apathy of an aimless generation. At the same time, a growing number of disaffected citizens came to view the Republic as distant, dispassionate, and not worth the membership. Manipulated by the Sith, the newly-formed Confederacy of Independent Systems went to war with the Republic, pitting the Separatist Droid Army against the Jedi-led Grand Army of the Republic.

In the waning days of the Clone Wars, the Jedi Generals were betrayed by their clone troopers as a result of a conspiracy that positioned Darth Sidious, Dark Lord of the Sith, to take unlimited power as Emperor of the first Galactic Empire in 19 BBY. With the Jedi eradicated and a new system supplanting the old democracy, the Empire drifted into a fascist state until the last remnant of the Republic was swept away just prior to the Battle of Yavin in 0 BBY. When the Emperor perished at the Battle of Endor in 4 ABY, the Alliance to Restore the Republic declared itself the New Republic and ultimately defeated the Imperial remnant a year later on Jakku. Under the New Republic Era, the Galactic Republic was remembered as the Republic of legend—a pillar upon which democracy and liberty stood for a millennium—its stewardship hailed as "the last era of peace" by the historian Janyor.

Despite the best efforts of the well-meaning Finis Valorum, the Trade Federation promptly invaded Naboo over disputes about plasma exports, in which a Judicial force carried Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice, Obi-Wan Kenobi, to the Saak'ak, a Trade Federation Lucrehulk-class LH-3210 cargo freighter to discuss a peaceful resolution to the conflict.[5][21] However, upon learning that Jedi had intervened, Dark Lord of the Sith Darth Sidious swiftly ordered their execution, an order which Viceroy Nute Gunray fearfully carried out, only to have the attempt end in failure, resulting in the escape of the Jedi. On the planet below, the Jedi managed to rescue then Queen Padmé Amidala seeking to bring her back to Coruscant; however, a damaged T-14 hyperdrive generator resulted in them making an unplanned landing on the desert planet of Tatooine. While stranded in the city of Mos Espa, Qui-Gon Jinn discovered then slave Anakin Skywalker, who he believed was the Chosen One destined to bring balance to the Force. Though it was not long before one of Sidious's agents, Darth Maul, attempted to eliminate the Jedi on the desert world, only to have the Jedi escape once more in the nick of time, with the now freed boy Anakin. Upon their arrival at Coruscant, Padmé was coerced by Senator Palpatine, who was taking advantage of his homeworld's delicate situation to have Valorum removed from office through a vote of no confidence. The vote passed, increasing the chances of Palpatine becoming the next Supreme Chancellor.[7]

Finding no sympathy in the Senate, Padmé Amidala returned to her world of Naboo and forged an alliance with Boss Nass of one of the Gungan underwater cities of Otoh Gunga, located underneath Lake Paonga. With the help of the Gungan Grand Army and freed members of the Royal Naboo Security Forces, along with a starfighter attack on the Saak'ak in orbit, the Trade Federation and its blockade were defeated, thanks largely to Anakin, who helped fire the shot that ultimately destroyed the control ship. However, the victory was not without its costs, with Qui-Gon's death at the hands of Darth Maul, and the Jedi's loss of knowledge of who was actually behind the attack. Nonetheless, with Naboo now freed from occupation, a grand parade was held in honor of their recent victory, while Palpatine himself arrived to announce his ascension to the position of Supreme Chancellor, also informing Anakin that he would watch his progress "with much interest."[7]

Separatist CrisisEdit
Blue Glass Arrow Main article: Separatist Crisis
"I will not let this Republic that has stood for a thousand years be split in two. My negotiations will not fail."
"If they do, you must realize that there aren't enough Jedi to protect the Republic. We're keepers of the peace, not soldiers."
―Supreme Chancellor Palpatine and Jedi Master Mace Windu[src]