In a dead-end corridor, Ahsoka and Bane fight against each other. While Ahsoka defeats Bane in hand-to-hand combat, the Padawan tries to telekinetically retrieve her lightsaber, although Bane tricks her. The bounty hunter grabs her ankle and sends a paralyzing electric shock through her, which renders her unconscious. Sensing that his Padawan is endangered, Skywalker frees himself from the debris inside the gunnery room, and orders Rex and the clones to secure a ship for them inside the frigate's docking bay.

Placing her in stuncuffs, and pulling her silka bead Padawan braid, Bane mocks Ahsoka and electrocutes her with his wrist comm, while he waits for Skywalker to "rescue her". Immediately, Skywalker enters the room, and Bane threatens to void Ahsoka out an airlock if he does not unlock the stolen holocron. Skywalker is forced to concede to save Ahsoka. Once the holocron is unlocked, Bane inserts the crystal. Enraged, Skywalker then spontaneously summons his and Ahsoka's lightsabers. Bane responds by opening the airlock and escaping. Desperate to save his Padawan, Skywalker throws a fragment of a B2 super battle droid, and closes the airlock door. Bane contacts Gunray to inform him of his success. Gunray asks him to transmit the information to him; however, Bane says that he'll deliver it to Sidious personally. However, his shuttle has already been taken by the clones. In a desperate attempt to capture Bane, Skywalker runs down a hallway, although Ahsoka forces the latter to return to Rex and the clones inside the hangar bay. The Jedi return, only to see the clones holding a Sheathipede-class transport shuttle.

On the top level of the hangar bay, troopers Denal and Koho engage Bane in a duel; however, the bounty hunter defeats the two clones and dresses himself in Denal's armor. Upon noticing that Bane might be dead, Ahsoka wishes to retrieve the holocron, although Skywalker claims that there wasn't any time to do so. Bane, who is wearing Denal's armor, enters Skywalker's ship. After leaving the frigate, Skywalker states that though they saw Bane fall to his death, he still feels Bane through the Force. When they return to the Resolute, Ahsoka apologizes to her master for letting Bane get the better of her; however, Skywalker corrects her, and says that the mission's failure was his fault, "from start to finish."