As Mace Windu and his forces head to Lessu along a cliffside path with AT-TE walkers, they are ambushed by several AATs. The tanks incapacitate the first walker in the line and then target the rear walkers, seeking to trap and destroy the Republic forces. Mace saves the gunner, and then Commander Ponds comes up to him and informs Windu that they're pinned down. Windu and Ponds orders Lightning Squadron to the front while Windu Force-pushes the first fallen walker off the cliff, clearing the path. Lightning squadron is deployed from the AT-TEs and moves up to the front. Mace, Commander Ponds and the rest of Lighting Squadron then overrun the tanks and the droids using AT-RTs and grenades. Afterwards Ponds tells Windu that they have lost thirty-two men along with command crews of three walkers. A recon droid spies on Windu and Ponds, discovering that the Republic forces will reach Lessu sooner than expected and that they will need help to take Lessu.

Watching the stream at his command center in Lessu, Emir Wat Tambor confers with his Tactical droid, TA-175, refusing to retreat, despite the odds being against him. Tambor states that Windu doesn't have the troops to take the city. Tambor orders that all droids to be brought into the city and to secure the bridge. In a holographic conference aboard Windu's lead AT-TE in his column, Anakin Skywalker informs Mace, Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, Yoda, Admiral Yularen and Senator Orn Free Taa that his fighters have the space around Ryloth secured. Mace mentions that Obi-Wan has taken the Jixuan desert, and that the southern hemisphere of Ryloth is secure; the only thing that remains is to retake Lessu. Republic spies are certain that Tambor has his command center there. Yoda asserts that when they have taken the city, they must capture Tambor, but Mace is unsure if that is possible: Tambor has chosen his stronghold well, and with the only way in or out of Lessu being a plasma bridge, a siege could drag on indefinitely. With republic forces stretched thin, Mace decides to enlist the help of the Twi'lek Resistance under the command of Cham Syndulla. Chancellor Palpatine states that Syndulla was a radical before the war and can be very unpredictable. Senator Taa mentions that before the War, they were political rivals, and still are. Senator Taa states that Syndulla seeks to gain power. Windu will leave the politics to Senator Taa, but Windu will do what he must to help his people. Palpatine requests reinforcements to be sent instead, but Admiral Yularen informs him that none are available. Mace states the Republic can't win without Syndulla's help.

Mace and two members of Lightning Squadron discovered the site of a massacre, accompanied by Twi'lek graves. Mace discovers fresh animal tracks, and they hear the sound of one of the animals. Mace heads along with troopers Razor and Stak.