Separatist CrisisEdit
"Wake up, Senators… you must wake up! If we offer the Separatists violence, they can only show us violence in return! Many will lose their lives. All will lose their freedom."
―Padmé Amidala, before the Galactic Senate, after the first of many attempts on her life[src]
Ten years after the Invasion of Naboo, former Jedi Count Dooku became the public face of a Confederacy of Independent Systems that had withdrawn from the Republic in opposition to the corruption they believed had enveloped the Senate. In response to the threat posed by this Separatist Alliance, the Republic Senate debated the proposed Military Creation Act that would allow Supreme Chancellor Palpatine to formally commission a Grand Army of the Republic. During this time, Amidala became a member of the Chancellor's Loyalist Committee and was regarded as the leader of the opposition to the Military Creation Act.

On the eve of the vote in the Senate over the Military Creation Act, Amidala arrived on Coruscant. Upon landing, her cruiser was hit in an assassination attempt by bounty hunter Zam Wesell, who had been hired to kill Amidala by Jango Fett, himself under the employee of Count Dooku. The explosion killed several of her guards as well as Amidala's double, Cordé. At the request of Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, the Jedi Council assigned Jedi Knights Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker to protect Amidala and investigate the incident, though Amidala objected to the added security. That evening, Amidala met with Kenobi and Skywalker in her penthouse apartment. With several years having passed, Skywalker was nervous to meet Amidala and while she hid her feelings, Kenobi noted that the senator was pleased to see Skywalker as well. That night, Zam Wesell tried again to kill Amidala by releasing two deadly kouhuns into her apartment using a droid. Kenobi and Skywalker sensed the attack and rushed into the bedroom. Skywalker managed to kill the Kouhuns as Kenobi jumped through the bedroom window and grabbed on to the droid as security officers rushed into the apartment. Kenobi and Skywalker, after a chase through the Coruscant skylanes, were able to capture Zam Wesell. Before she could reveal the plot behind the assassination attempts on Amidala, Wesell was killed by Jango Fett using a Kamino dart.[8]

In the aftermath of continued attacks, Amidala was convinced to leave Coruscant and to return to Naboo. While Skywalker went with her to continue protecting her, Kenobi continued the investigation into the assassination attempts. Upon arriving on Naboo, Amidala and Skywalker grew closer in their relationship and Skywalker told her of his love for her. However, since Skywalker was committed to the Jedi Order and Amidala to the Senate, they both agreed to forgo pursing a more romantic relationship. While on Naboo, Skywalker started experiencing Force visions of his mother in danger. Convinced he had to save her, he determined to travel to Tatooine. Amidala traveled with him and upon their arrival at the Lars moisture farm, Skywalker discovered that his mother had been taken by Tusken Raiders. He was able to track them down, but was too late and his mother died in his arms. Angered, he slaughtered the entire village including the women and children. He returned to the homestead to bury his mother. Later, Skywalker confessed to Amidala his despair and anger and what he had done and she attempted to comfort him.[8]

War and marriageEdit
"You call this a diplomatic solution?"
"No, I call it aggressive negotiations."
―Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala — Gnome-speakernotesListen (file info)[src]
Meanwhile, Kenobi had traced Jango Fett to the planet Geonosis and discovered that Count Dooku was behind the assassination attempts. He also learned that the Separatists had built a droid army to attack the Republic and that the Republic had at its disposal an army of clone troopers supposedly commissioned by the long deceased Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas. Requesting that Skywalker relay his message to Coruscant, Kenobi informed the Jedi and the Senate what he had discovered, just before he was captured. The Jedi decided to send an assault team, while Skywalker was ordered to stay with Amidala. Torn over the desire to rescue his master but yet also protect the senator, Amidala came to the decision to help Skywalker by traveling to Geonosis, forcing Skywalker to accompany her. However, their rescue was a failure and they were captured. Before they were led to the arena to be executed, Amidala confessed her love for Skywalker, reasoning that there was no point in denying it before they died.[8]

The execution of Amidala, Skywalker, and Kenobi was to be carried out by several creatures brought into the arena, a reek, an acklay, and a nexu. The nexu attacked Amidala, climbing the pillar she was on. She tried fending the beast off with her chains, but the nexu slashed its claws onto Amidala's back, injuring her severely. This caused the waistband and up of her clothing torn apart, and Amidala began screaming and sobbing in pain as tears trickled down her cheek. The nexu came back, and Amidala nearly fell, but thanks to Anakin and the reek, she was saved. When they were released and attacked, Jedi Master Mace Windu arrived and the Jedi revealed themselves. A full out battle erupted, and though Amidala had been wounded by one of the creatures, she also grabbed a blaster and fought side-by-side with the Jedi. Of the original two hundred Jedi who had arrived, only a few were left and the situation seemed lost. At that point, Master Yoda arrived with the newly christened Grand Army of the Republic and the Battle of Geonosis began in earnest. Skywalker, Kenobi, and Amidala pursued Count Dooku in a Republic gunship, but Amidala and a clone trooper were knocked from the troop bay by a cannon blast. They were able to call backup, but arrived too late to stop Dooku who had fought against Skywalker and Kenobi before being defeated by Yoda. After the battle, Skywalker and Amidala returned to Naboo where they were secretly married.