A world under siege! The Separatist
have launched a massive offensive against
the planet Ryloth. A blockade of deadly
battleships has cut off any support for
the dwindling Republic defenses.

Though they have fought valiantly with
the help of Twi'lek freedom fighter Cham
Syndulla, hope is fading for Jedi Master
Di and his men as the droid army closes
in....
Ryloth has been invaded and blockaded by the Separatists, and Jedi Master Ima-Gun Di, his troops and Twi'lek Resistance leader Cham Syndulla are hardpressed to maintain their positions against the droid army as supplies run low. Master Di makes contact with the Republic relief supply fleet under Admiral Dao. In no position to deliver supplies himself, however, as he has fallen under attack himself by the Separatist blockade, Dao makes contact with the Jedi Temple, begging that reinforcements be dispatched, before his ship is destroyed. Since no other relief forces are close by, the Jedi Council (represented by Yoda, Mace Windu, and Obi-Wan Kenobi) asks Senator Organa, who has just finished a senate mission, to travel to nearby Toydaria and ask King Katuunko to use the planet as a supply staging base. Jar Jar Binks is dispatched to assist him.

Organa and Jar Jar are granted an audience with the king and his council, but negotiations are rendered complicated by the arrival of Lott Dod, the Senate representative of the Trade Federation sent by Count Dooku, who has caught wind of Organa's mission. Organa and Binks stress their humanitarian intentions in the matter, but Dod points out that by agreeing to deliver supplies to Ryloth and the Republic troops, Toydaria, who had declared her strict neutrality in this war, would be taking sides and thus shatter her principles. After thorough consideration, Katuunko officially denies the Republic their rights to a base on Toydaria, but afterwards he secretly meets Organa and Binks and tells them that the humanitarian factor has actually gained his favor. He agrees to load Organa's ship with a preliminary supply of provisions if Organa can keep the involvement of Toydaria secret. Organa hits upon the plan to have Jar Jar distract Dod during a banquet, a task which the Gungan performs with extraordinary skill, while Organa supervises the loading of the relief supplies.

Meanwhile, the situation on Ryloth is growing more desperate by the hour, and the Republic and Twi'lek troops are forced to retreat to a safe position. Syndulla announces that his people cannot fight any longer, voicing doubts that the Republic will ever aid them. To cover their escape, Master Di uses a gunship loaded with explosives to cut off a mountain pass leading to their position, forcing the droids down another way, where they can be more easily held off. The droids arrive soon and overrun the remaining clone troopers, but just after Captain Keeli is gunned down and Di heavily wounded, he receives word that a load of supplies is on its way, and he dies content with the knowledge that the Twi'leks will survive. The supplies are dropped in front of Syndulla's convoy, raising cheers and renewing hope.

As Organa and Binks are bidden farewell by Katuunko, Dod steps in and protests that they have broken the agreement, a claim for which Organa cheekily demands proof. Unable to give any, Dod storms off, fuming, and Katuunko turns to the senators with the announcement that in the light of these events Toydaria may be reconsidering her stance of neutrality, a news that greatly gladdens Organa and Binks.