Luke Skywalker, a Force-sensitive human male, was a legendary Jedi Master who fought in the Galactic Civil War during the reign of the Galactic Empire. Along with his companions, Princess Leia Organa and Captain Han Solo, Skywalker served on the side of the Alliance to Restore the Republic—an organization committed to the downfall of Emperor Palpatine and the restoration of democracy. Following the war, Skywalker became a living legend, and was remembered as one of the greatest Jedi in galactic history.

The son of Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker and Senator Padmé Amidala, Luke Skywalker was born along with his twin sister Leia in 19 BBY. As a result of Amidala's death and Anakin's fall to the dark side of the Force, the Skywalker children were separated and sent into hiding, with Leia adopted by the royal family of Alderaan while Luke was raised by his relatives on Tatooine. Longing for a life of adventure and purpose, Skywalker joined the Rebellion and began learning the ways of the Force under the guidance of Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi, whose first apprentice was Luke's own father. During the Battle of Yavin in 0 BBY, Skywalker saved the Alliance from annihilation by destroying the Empire's planet-killing superweapon, the Death Star. He continued his training in the years that followed, determined to become a Jedi Knight like his father before him, and found a new mentor in Grand Master Yoda. After his master's death, Skywalker participated in the Battle of Endor in 4 ABY, during which he confronted the Sith Lord Darth Vader, whom he learned was in fact his father, Anakin Skywalker. With Luke's help, Anakin returned to the light side of the Force by destroying the Emperor at the cost of his own life, fulfilling his destiny as the Chosen One.

With the Sith's destruction and the subsequent capitulation of the Empire in 5 ABY, Luke Skywalker traveled across the galaxy, searching for knowledge that would aid him in rebuilding the Jedi Order. One of his apprentices was his sister's son, Ben Solo, who inherited the Skywalker bloodline's raw strength and potential for limitless power. The loss of his nephew, who fell to the dark side like Vader before him, haunted Skywalker for the rest of his life. In addition, the destruction of his nascent Order convinced him that the time had come for the Jedi to end. He therefore sought exile on the distant world of Ahch-To, having elected to live out his remaining days as a hermit while ignoring the galaxy's pleas for help during the rise of the First Order. His solitude was interrupted in 34 ABY, shortly after the fall of the New Republic, resulting in a chain of events that led Skywalker to play one last, momentous role in the conflict between light and darkness. Although he passed away into the Force, his legend would spread throughout the galaxy, rekindling a spark of hope in the enemies of the First Order. Before his death, Skywalker declared that the Jedi Order would not die with him, having trained a final apprentice: the Jakku scavenger known as Rey.

During the Clone Wars, Jedi Master Yoda set out on a journey to discover the secrets of immortality. His journey took him to Moraband, the ancient Sith homeworld, where he faced visions of the future. At the end of his journey, the Force Priestess, Serenity, who guided his journey told him that there was another Skywalker, and Yoda heard his voice from the future say so as well.[15] These events alluded to the birth and destiny of Luke Skywalker, as well as his twin sister Leia.[13]

Early life
Birth
"It's a boy."
"Luke."
―Obi-Wan Kenobi and Padmé Amidala —

Luke Skywalker was born in 19 BBY[2] on the asteroid of Polis Massa[4] two days after the proclamation of the Galactic Empire.[3] He and his twin sister Leia, who was born shortly after him, were the children of Galactic Republic Senator Padmé Amidala, who died shortly after labor, and Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, who had recently fallen to the dark side of the Force. To protect the children from the Empire and Anakin, the now-Sith Lord Darth Vader, Obi-Wan Kenobi personally sent the infant Luke to live with Anakin's stepbrother Owen Lars and his wife Beru on the planet Tatooine, while Senator Bail Organa agreed to adopt Leia together with his wife, the queen of Alderaan.[4]

First years on the farm
"And what of the boy."
"To Tatooine. To his family, send him."
―Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda discuss Skywalker's future

Skywalker spent his youth on the Lars' moisture farm, where his uncle unsuccessfully tried to discourage his adventurous tendencies, telling him that his father had been "a navigator on a spice freighter" during the Clone Wars.[1] His aunt, Beru, would read him storybooks; one day, when his uncle had business in Mos Eisley, she took Skywalker to Anchorhead to use the HoloNet connections there and show him images of forests, rivers, and oceans.[9]

By the age of three in 16 BBY, Luke had found pleasure playing with a model spaceship built especially for him. Luke did not know that Kenobi had actually built it and that Kenobi had been leaving several of them at his grandmother Shmi's sandblasted tombstone for his aunt to find. One morning, as Luke played with his toy, a group of marauders attacked the farm. Obi-Wan Kenobi, who had been watching Luke from afar, sprang into action, cutting down several Gamorreans before coming to the realization that he was badly outnumbered. Just as he was about to be dealt a possibly killing blow by one of the gang, Luke threw the toy starfighter he had been playing with, managing to distract the Gammorean long enough for Kenobi to separate his feet from his ankles. The battle then raged further, slowly turning in the favor of the defenders which included uncle Owen, who managed to gun down several of the invaders with a blaster. Luke cried out after noticing that one of the marauders, a Devaronian, had snuck up behind Owen, ready to knock him out. Kenobi then threw his lightsaber cutting the last marauder in half. As Luke cheered, Owen threw a punch which knocked Kenobi to the ground. Owen then ushered Luke back before chastising Kenobi for his involvement, pointing out the fact that Luke's brief show of bravery had potential ramifications for the boy's future.[16]

Vader's vision
Shortly after the Battle of Fortress Vader, Darth Vader accessed a portal to the dark side created by Momin in an attempt to revive Padmé. He eventually found an apparition of Padmé standing on a balcony, who rejected his pleas and threw itself off the ledge and was incinerated by lightning. Just after this, Vader saw a blue light in the distance, out of which emerged an apparition of an adult Luke, who blasted him back to reality.