Stolen secrets! Villainous mercenary
Cad Bane was hired by Darth Sidious
to steal a holocron from the vaults of the
Jedi Temple. After fleeing the scene of
the crime, Bane hunted down and captured
Master Bolla Ropal, who has a crystal
which holds the secrets of the Jedi Order.
As a Separatist fleet arrives to help the
bounty hunter, Anakin Skywalker races in
to cut off their escape and stop Bane from
delivering the stolen holocron.
Anakin Skywalker's fleet arrives in the Devaron system, cutting off the Separatist fleet assisting bounty hunter Cad Bane. Unfortunately, clone trooper scouts tell Skywalker that Bane has already captured Jedi Master Bolla Ropal and the Kyber memory crystal. Taken hostage on one Munificent-class star frigate frigate, Ropal is held in energy bond. While on the frigate's bridge, Bane orders the droids to get clear to jump to hyperspace. However, his ship has been seen by the crew onboard Skywalker's Venator-class Star Destroyer, Resolute. The crew fires at Bane's frigate, crippling its hyperdrive systems. Captain Rex, Skywalker, and his Padawan, Ahsoka Tano, come up with a plan to infiltrate the frigate with three AT-TEs providing fire support.

Meanwhile, Bane tortures Ropal, and forces him to open the stolen holocron; however, Ropal defiantly refuses. Bane tells the droids to increase power of the energy bond, which electrocutes Ropal to his death. In need of another Jedi to open his stolen holocron, Bane returns to the bridge and notices Skywalker, Ahsoka, and their clones preparing to board his frigate through a viewscreen. Trade Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray contacts Bane via comlink, and is angry at Bane for losing four of his ships and demands repayment; however, Bane promises that Darth Sidious will compensate once the holocron is unlocked, and tells the viceroy about the two Jedi that were about to infiltrate his frigate. Before leaving the bridge, Bane orders the droids to wipe navigation charts, trigger self-destruct and transfer ship functions to his wrist gauntlet. Skywalker, Ahsoka, and the clones storm the bridge and destroy several stationed B1 battle droids. Skywalker's astromech droid, R2-D2, then accesses the ship's computer to locate Ropal.

The group then make their way to the frigate's detention block, and Ahsoka finds Roppal dead inside his cell. An explosion from Bane's frigate rocks the ship, which Admiral Wullf Yularen, who is onboard the Resolute, advises the Republic group to stay clear of. Soon, the lights go out, forcing the clones to switch to night vision mode on their helmets. The squad sees Bane running, and they follow him in pursuit to the frigate's gunnery room. Bane orders his battle droid forces to eliminate the Jedi, and turns off the artificial gravity. Ahsoka orders Artoo to reactivate the gravity. Attacking the bounty hunter, Skywalker kicks the holocron out of Bane's hands, but before he can grab it, Artoo reactivates the gravity, and Bane reclaims the holocron on the ground. In retaliation, Ahsoka chases after the fleeing Bane, despite her Master's warnings. Skywalker tries to cut through a closed blast door to rescue Ahsoka; however, a droid trips and shoots an artillery shell, which causes an explosion.