Protecting Senator AmidalaEdit
"You know, I don't like it when you do that!"
"Sorry Master. I forgot you don't like flying."
"I don't mind flying, but what you're doing is suicide!"
―Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker

Following an assassination attempt on Senator Amidala on Coruscant and their return from a border dispute on Ansion, the Jedi Council sent—at the behest of Supreme Chancellor Sheev Palpatine—Kenobi and Skywalker to protect the Senator from future attacks. Kenobi sensed his apprentice's anxiety and warned Skywalker of over-stepping their duties, only to be told later of Amidala's plan to use herself as a bait.[19]

That night, Zam Wesell attempted to kill the Senator with venomous kouhun, but her plot was foiled and Kenobi used her probe droid to go through the express ways and find Wesell. Assisted by Skywalker's arrival in a speeder, they pursued the bounty hunter together through Coruscant until her speeder crashed outside a nightclub. The Jedi followed her in, realizing she was a changeling; however, Kenobi soon found Wesell and cut her arm off with his lightsaber before she could shoot him. Before she could tell the Jedi who she was working for, Wesell was shot and killed by a toxic dart fired by Jango Fett.

Subsequently, Kenobi and Skywalker were sent on separate missions by the Council—while Kenobi continued an investigation on Amidala's aggressors, Skywalker would protect her on Naboo. Despite thinking his Padawan was not prepared for his first solo mission, he abided by Council's request. Kenobi, then, took the toxic dart to his friend Dexter Jettster, who told him that it was a Kamino saberdart. Using Dex's information about Kamino, Kenobi visited the Archives, but he was unable to locate the system. When he asked Jocasta Nu about it, she surmised that the system must not exist since it was not in the archives. Unconvinced, Kenobi visited Master Yoda, who was teaching the Bear Clan, and the two agreed that someone had erased the files on Kamino from the Archives, and that Kenobi needed to visit the location of the lost planet.[19]

Discovery of the Clone ArmyEdit
"I have successfully made contact with the Prime Minister of Kamino. They are using a bounty hunter named Jango Fett to create a clone army."
―Obi-Wan Kenobi, to Mace Windu and Yoda[src]
Upon arriving on Kamino, Kenobi was greeted by the Kaminoan Taun We who told the Jedi that they had been expecting him. She took Obi-Wan to Prime Minister Lama Su, who said Sifo-Dyas would have been proud of the army they had created in accordance with his request—to create a clone army for the Republic. Kenobi was then shown the clones' prowess and growth, and was told that the original template was Jango Fett. After asking to meet Fett, Taun We took Kenobi to Fett's quarters, where the Jedi Knight asked the bounty hunter questions concerning any recent visits to Coruscant.[19]

After their meeting, Jango and his clone son, Boba Fett, attempted to flee Kamino in the bounty hunter's ship, Slave I. Obi-Wan confronted Jango, and the two fought on the landing platform. At the end of the battle, Obi-Wan fell off the platform, and Jango believed he had fallen into the sea. However, Obi-Wan managed to catch hold of a bridge, and he returned to the platform to see Slave I taking off with just enough time for Obi-Wan to attach a homing beacon to Jango's hull.[19]

Capture on GeonosisEdit
"You must join me, Obi-Wan. And together, we will destroy the Sith!"
"I will never join you, Dooku.
"It may be difficult to secure your release."
―Count Dooku and Obi-Wan Kenobi