A thief hunted! In a daring assault
Anakin Skywalker and his Padawan
Ahsoka boarded the warship of
cunning bounty hunter Cad Bane to
recover a stolen holocron containing
a list of the galaxy's Force-sensitive
children and future Jedi Knights.
After a desperate chase and duel with
the villain, Anakin and his troops
defeated Bane, but were forced to
evacuate his doomed vessel without
the holocron...
Anakin Skywalker and Ahsoka Tano, returning from their failed mission to recapture the holocron captured by Cad Bane, whom they believe to be dead, land on the Resolute orbiting the Devaron System. Tano follows the clone trooper Denal, who supposedly killed Cad Bane and is injured, constantly asking questions with no answer from the clone. Skywalker, in the meantime, investigates a drop of green Duros blood on the floor of the shuttle they returned on and is alerted to the danger. He warns Tano, but it is too late. She is kneed in the chest by Cad Bane, disguised as the clone trooper, and he runs to the fighters to get away. Skywalker attempts to stop him by jumping onto the fighter, but Bane swerves the ship into the vacuum of space and he is forced to jump off. Skywalker then helplessly contacts Admiral Yularen and tells him to deactivate the hyperspace transport rings, but Yularen, too, is not in time, and Cad Bane escapes.

Back on Coruscant, Skywalker and Tano report to the Jedi High Council of the unfortunate turn of events. With Bane having access to the list of all Force-sensitive children in the holocron, that information is now in Separatist hands, which could be disastrous for the Order. Their only hope is to search through the Force to watch for any kidnappings.

Elsewhere, Bane is instructed by Sidious to capture a few Force-sensitive children and bring them to Mustafar; Bane considers it rash to kidnap innocents, but doesn't care, as long as he gets paid.

Yoda, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Mace Windu and Skywalker meditate, trying to detect any children through the Force, as many are being overshadowed by the dark side. Skywalker then heads to Naboo to secure a Gungan child, and Kenobi to Rodia.

On Rodia, Bane poses as a Jedi, claiming that he is to take the child Wee Dunn to Coruscant; his mother protests that Master Bolla Ropal insisted that he is too young to do so; Bane insists, bluffing that there are "impostor" Jedi roaming around but Wee's mother refuses to let him go. Bane then uses a spinning device to "relax" her.

Kenobi then arrives on Rodia, hurrying to the Dunn home. However, Wee's mother threatens Kenobi with a blaster, but he pulls it out of her hands, demanding to know where Bane is. Bane then appears in the door, before flying off to his fighter and escaping.