Diplomacy or deception? The Council of
Neutral Systems speaks for over 1,500
worlds who want to stay out of the war.
But rumors have reached the Republic
Senate suggesting that the Council's new
leader — Duchess Satine of Mandalore —
is secretly building her own army to fight
for the Separatist cause!

Now, Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi has
been sent to Mandalore to discover the
truth behind these claims…

Obi-Wan arrives at Sundari on Mandalore, and is escorted via speeder to meet Duchess Satine. He is met by Prime Minister Almec, who claims Mandalore's violence died out with the warriors on Concordia, Mandalore's moon. Satine arrives, and she and Obi-Wan engage in a brief, flirtatious conversation (mixed with mild aversion) before Obi-Wan shows her a hologram of a figure in Mandalorian armor attacking a Republic cruiser. Satine assures him that she is not behind the attack, and she and Obi-Wan set out for a tour of the city.

They travel to a garden, where Satine tells Obi-Wan of a rogue group of Mandalorians called Death Watch, which is opposed to Satine's peaceful ways. She claims she has worked to root out the group of criminals, and has tracked them to Concordia.

Meanwhile, on Concordia, a man in Mandalorian armor is conversing with a hologram of Count Dooku, who has promised to support Death Watch. They plan to rally more citizens to their cause so they can overthrow the Duchess.

Back on Mandalore, Satine and Obi-Wan are touring the gardens when there is an explosion. Satine and Obi-Wan rush in to rescue the injured, and see a hologram showing the crest of Death Watch. Obi-Wan spots a man fleeing the scene, and pursues him through the gardens. After a brief struggle, the man jumps off a balcony, preferring to commit suicide rather than being kidnapped and interrogated by the Jedi. However, Satine and Obi-Wan manage to reach the dying man on the lower floor, a few seconds before his decease, when the Mandalorian whispers his last words to the Duchess in the dialect of Concordia.

Obi-Wan and Satine travel to the moon, and are greeted by Governor Pre Vizsla. The Jedi decides to secretly investigate the situation on Concordia and gives Satine an earpiece so they can communicate, then takes a speeder bike and travels to one of the moon's supposedly nonoperational mines, where, after a small scuffle, he is captured by two armed Mandalorians. He then contacts Satine, who is drinking with Vizsla, pretending Obi-Wan is meditating in his chamber and is going to join them in a few minutes. She excuses herself, and sets off on a speeder bike towards the mine, where she shuts down the mining machine which would have crushed Kenobi . They escape through a turbolift, but are cut off by a group of Death Watch members in armor. The group's leader orders an evacuation of the mines, then reveals his face. It is Governor Vizsla, who has been plotting against Satine and the Jedi. He gives Kenobi's lightsaber back to him, then brandishes his own Darksaber. They duel, and Vizsla is defeated. He orders his warriors to kill Kenobi, who escapes with Satine down the turbolift shaft. They journey back to Sundari, where Obi-Wan tells Satine he believes the Separatists are aiding Death Watch. But despite the evidence, Satine vows to stay out of the war. Anakin arrives to report for duty, and he and Obi-Wan join Satine aboard her starship.