"I'm a Republic officer, General. I swore an oath to protect the Republic, to—"
"No, you misunderstand. I like it. It was rash of you, as I said, it was foolish. But we could use some rash these days, and foolish and passionate are often confused, and passion is something we desperately need."
―Poe Dameron and Leia Organa[src]

To be a check on the designs of the First Order, Organa formed the Resistance with a base on D'Qar, in an outpost that was once intended as an Alliance base during the war. The Resistance was a splinter group from the Republic's military and operated wholly independently of the Republic chain of command. The Republic quietly tolerated Organa's activities,[9] as she pursued evidence that the First Order was violating the Galactic Concordance, while some members of the Galactic Senate secretly supported her actions with their funding and sympathies. The Resistance went into combat against the First Order on a few occasions and even exposed the New Republic senator Erudo Ro-Kiintor as a First Order agent.

Following Operation: Sabre Strike, General Organa knew that the Resistance would need more help, so she hoped to find her missing brother, Jedi Master Luke Skywalker, who had gone into exile after the destruction of his new generation of Jedi.[21] Believing that Lor San Tekka held the key to finding Skywalker, General Organa sent Poe Dameron and his Black Squadron on a quest to find the ancient explorer. Using the information acquired during Operation: Sabre Strike, Black Squadron undertook a mission to Ovanis to question the Crèche cultists about Tekka's whereabouts.[22]

Their mission was complicated when the First Order dispatched Agent Terex to recover the information that Poe had acquired during Operation: Sabre Strike. While Poe dealt with the Crèche and Terex's landing party, Black Squadron at the urging of L'ulo L'ampar attacked Terex's TIE fighters and landing platform.[23] The fighting was complicated when two large winged creatures hatched from the Crèche egg and fought. Ultimately, Poe defeated Terex in physical combat and forced the First Order agent to withdraw his forces. Having obtained the information from the Crèche elder, Poe and Black Squadron departed Ovanis.[24]

Continuing their search for Lor San Tekka, General Organa bribed Warden Luta into letting Black Squadron enter Megalox prison on the high-gravity world of Megalox Beta to question Grakkus the Hutt. However, Terex found his way first and managed to bribe Luta into abandoning Black Squadron inside the prison. Despite Terex's tactics, Poe and his fellow pilots managed to reach Grakkus' fortress. Grakkus then offered to sell the information to whoever got him out of the prison first.[25] In response, Poe got BB-8 and the other astromech droids to embark on a mission to disable Megalox space station's gravity shield. Jess's droid O-R10N was destroyed by a security droid.[26]

When Terex hired an army of gangsters to attack Grakkus' fortress, Black Squadron joined Grakkus' posse in fighting off the rival gangs.[26] They held out long enough for BB-8 and his team to deactivate the gravity shield. While Terex and the other gangsters were crushed under the weight of Megalox Beta's high gravity, Poe and his fellow pilots were unaffected since they wore gravity belts. After rescuing Grakkus, they convinced Luta to let them go in return for restoring control of the prison. Before escorting Grakkus into hyperspace, Black Squadron stopped Terex's starship Carrion Spike from attacking the Megalox prison shuttles rushing to evacuate the prisoners. Having extracted the necessary information from Grakkus, Black Squadron allowed him to flee into hyperspace.