Obi-Wan Kenobi, was a Force-sensitive human male, was a legendary Jedi Master and member of the Jedi High Council during the Fall of the Republic. During the Age of the Empire, he went by the alias of Ben Kenobi in order to hide from the regime that drove the Jedi to near extinction in the aftermath of the Clone Wars. A nobleman known for his skills with the Force, Kenobi trained Anakin Skywalker as his Padawan, served as a Jedi General in the Grand Army of the Republic, and became a mentor to Luke Skywalker prior to his death in 0 BBY.

Born on the planet Stewjon in 57 BBY, Kenobi was inducted into the Jedi Order at a young age and became the apprentice of Qui-Gon Jinn after completing his initial lessons under Grand Master Yoda. During the Invasion of Naboo in 32 BBY, Kenobi defeated the Sith Lord Darth Maul and was awarded the status of Jedi Knight. Kenobi also began training Anakin Skywalker, having promised his dying master that the boy would become a Jedi, but often had to rein in his adventure-seeking apprentice. Over the years Kenobi became concerned that Skywalker's powers made him arrogant but also regarded him as a good friend and a brother, and ultimately believed that Skywalker was in fact the Chosen One destined to restore balance to the Force by destroying the Sith.

When the Clone Wars began in 22 BBY, the Jedi rallied to defend the Galactic Republic against the Confederacy of Independent Systems, and Kenobi became a general in the newly-formed Republic Military. Kenobi and Skywalker often served alongside each other, leading their respective clone trooper divisions, the 212th Attack Battalion, and the 501st Legion, against the Separatist Droid Army. However, in 19 BBY Skywalker fell to the dark side of the Force and embraced his new identity as the Sith Lord Darth Vader. Kenobi, who was betrayed by his soldiers as a result of Order 66, confronted his fallen apprentice on Mustafar. The ensuing lightsaber duel between the former friends concluded when Vader was maimed at the hands of his one-time master, who withdrew into exile with Skywalker's newborn son.

For two decades Kenobi lived as a hermit on the planet Tatooine, located in the Outer Rim Territories, hiding from the Galactic Empire that replaced the Republic. When Princess Leia Organa beseeched him to join their Rebel cause in 0 BBY, Kenobi was prepared to join the Alliance to Restore the Republic and also decided that the time had come for Luke Skywalker to become a Jedi like his father before him. However, their journey to Alderaan became a rescue operation upon discovering that the princess had been taken as a prisoner to the Death Star. While attempting to help his allies escape from the battle station, Kenobi encountered Vader, now rebuilt as a cyborg and forced to rely on an armored suit with life support technology in order to survive. Though he initially defended himself, Kenobi ultimately sacrificed himself, allowing Vader to strike him down as the Rebels fled on the Millennium Falcon. Yet death was not the end of Obi-Wan Kenobi, however. Having learned to preserve his identity in the Force, Kenobi became a Force spirit and was, therefore, able to continue guiding Luke on the path to Jedi Knighthood.

A human male from Stewjon,[5] Obi-Wan Kenobi was born 57 years before the Battle of Yavin.[2] A Force-sensitive individual, he was taken to the Jedi Temple on Coruscant to be trained as a Jedi[5] at the age of three,[12] an unusually late age since younglings were typically identified within six months of their birth.[13] At some point, before he was selected as a Padawan, Kenobi attended a class centered around meditation.[14] When Kenobi was a youngling, he underwent training with Grand Master Yoda before being assigned as Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn's Padawan learner.[5] who taught him there was "a strength and nobility in restraint".[15] Sometime after being assigned to Jinn, Kenobi and his master engaged in a lightsaber training session, where Jinn congratulated his apprentice for his skills.[14] At some point during his time as a Padawan, Kenobi, and Jinn, visited a fortress on the planet Lah'mu.[12]

Protecting Satine KryzeEdit
"You and Satine have a history."
"An extended mission when I was younger. Master Qui-Gon and I spent a year on Mandalore protecting the duchess from insurgents who had threatened her world. They sent Bounty hunters after us. We were always on the run, living hand-to-mouth, never sure what the next day would bring."
―Anakin Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi[src]
At some point, Kenobi and Jinn spent a year on the planet Mandalore protecting Duchess Satine Kryze from insurgents who were threatening her world. Bounty hunters were sent after them, forcing them to live as fugitives, never knowing what the next day would bring them. During that time, they had an incident with a swarm of venom-mites on Draboon, where Kenobi carried Kryze to safety, only to fall and drop the Duchess, who then acquired a scar. Obi-Wan fell in love with Satine during his stay on Mandalore, but despite his feelings toward her, he continued with his training and was reassigned. Kenobi regretted leaving her, but ultimately followed the Jedi Code he had sworn to live by.[16]

Saving Th'erEdit
"Where are we heading, master?"
―Obi-Wan Kenobi to Qui-Gon Jinn when escaping from the Metal Clan

The Jedi Order sent Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon to the planet Bri'n to resolve a conflict. On Bri'n, the leader of the Metal Clan attempted to capture priestess Th'er so that either her word or her blood could be used to destroy her trees. Surrounded by forces of the Metal Clan, Jinn chose to escape with Th'er in an Eta-class shuttle and return to Coruscant.[17]

Operating in the vicinity of BotorEdit
At some point prior to 32 BBY, Jinn and Kenobi were operating in the vicinity of a planet that served as a base of the Flesh Mongers pirate group, flying a pair of  Delta-7 Aethersprite-class light interceptors. The two received a message from the surface of the planet from Jedi Master Yoda, who was asking for assistance. Landing on the planet, Jinn and Kenobi discovered that Yoda had taken out the entire pirate gang in order to rescue a young Force-sensitive child, known as Lo, as the pirate had planned to sell him due to his abilities in the Force.[18]

Invasion of NabooEdit
"I have a bad feeling about this."
"I don't sense anything."
"It's not about the mission, Master. It's something elsewhere…elusive."
―Obi-Wan Kenobi and Qui-Gon Jinn —

By the time Jinn considered Kenobi to be ready for his trials, they were sent by Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum to negotiate with the Trade Federation, who had set up a blockade around the planet of Naboo. However, negotiations did not take place as Viceroy Nute Gunray instead sent B1 battle droids and droidekas to kill the two Jedi, but they escaped to Naboo's surface by stowing away on separate landing craft.

On Naboo, Kenobi found Jinn in the company of Gungan Jar Jar Binks, who reluctantly led the two Jedi to Otoh Gunga, where they met with the Gungan leader Boss Nass. Though unable to convince the Gungans to help the humans of Naboo, Jinn influenced Nass to give them transport to allow them to reach Theed. Piloting the transport through the planet's core, Kenobi, Jinn, and Binks reached Theed only to discover that the Trade Federation had already taken control of the city. After rescuing Queen Amidala and several others, the Jedi took Amidala off of Naboo in her starship in an attempt to reach Coruscant with news of the invasion. During the escape, the ship's hyperdrive was damaged, which prevented them from going straight to Coruscant and forced them to land on Tatooine for repairs.[10]