Danger looms! Despite recent victories
in the Outer Rim, criminal minds plot
at the very heart of the Republic! The
bounty hunter Cad Bane has assembled
some of the deadliest criminals in the
galaxy and plans a daring attack to
seize members of the Senate. What can
be the aim of this despicable act?
Cad Bane and his crew of bounty hunters, along with a few droid enforcers, arrived at the Senate landing zone, where they meet a host of Senate Commandos, who were not happy with their unauthorized arrival and tried to arrest him. However, three commandos are sniped by Aurra Sing from long-range and the rest of the bounty hunters overwhelm the members of the squad. A commando droid fools security into thinking that the Senate Commando squad had taken care of a group of protesters against the war before promptly taking their uniforms. Aurra Sing and the rest of the bounty hunters then meet the group on the landing platform.

A few levels above, in Senator Padmé Amidala's office, her husband, Anakin offers to take her to somewhere in the galaxy for a few weeks, where no one will recognize them, but Padmé is too focused on her work. Anakin then gave his lightsaber to Padmé to show that he trusts her with his life. However, he has to hide, as Threepio and Senator Organa are about to enter. Padmé quickly took the lightsaber off of her desk and hid it in her sleeve. Organa informs Padmé that they must meet in the lobby to discuss the Enhanced Privacy Invasion Bill. Meanwhile Bane and his crew take out the rest of the senate commandos and then go down to the control panel room and subdue the droids there, leaving Robonino to get the power down. The bounty hunters then leave to talk to some senators. Suddenly, once all the senators are gathered, the bounty hunters surround and take them hostage. Senator Philo attempts to leave only to be shot by Bane in the back. He then communicates with Chancellor Palpatine, demanding the release of Ziro the Hutt from captivity. Palpatine refuses to do so. Unfortunately, Bane proves his point by locking down the entire building, severing all communication with the outside. He then took every person's comlinks, but before he could search Padmé, who is holding Anakin's lightsaber in her sleeve, Bane noticed Anakin in the upper levels. Bane shot at him and then orders an IG-86 sentinel droid and Shahan Alama to get him.

Anakin manages to elude his pursuers and hot-wires a terminal to communicate with Palpatine. The Chancellor advises Anakin to get to the central power core to contact for help. Anakin managed to disconnect and hide before the bounty hunters find him, and then used a mind trick to convince Alama to check the other two floors. As the hunters split up, Anakin followed the IG-86 sentinel droid and managed to bash it into submission. Alama came back down to check and found the droid's mangled remains. Noticing no lightsaber slashes, he quickly figured out that Anakin wasn't armed. He reported this to Bane, who then sent Sing to assist Alama in the search.

Anakin managed to locate the power core, but a panicked Robonino shut the door behind him. Alama then come up behind Anakin. Though Anakin grabbed his gun, Sing then attacked Anakin, and Robonino shocked him into unconsciousness.