The death toll rises! As the battles intensify,
and threaten a growing number of Republic
worlds, planets are left to survive on their
own. While the Jedi struggle to fight a war
on many fronts, a series of medical stations
have been established as a lifeline for those
in need, but the facilities are easy prey for
Separatist attacks. After losing contact with
the medical station orbiting Felucia,
Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker and
Ahsoka Tano are sent to investigate....
A Jedi shuttle carrying Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and Ahsoka Tano emerges from hyperspace to investigate the disappearance of a medical station orbiting over the fungi-world of Felucia. They immediately encounter an orbital Vulture droid deployer. The vulture droids attack the shuttle and force it to crash-land on Felucia. The Jedi eject from the ship once it enters the atmosphere and once the survival pods land, they look for civilization. They then find a nysillin spice farm village. It appears deserted after they started searching in houses. They then find a ship in the barn of the farm. Anakin and Ahsoka finds Felucian farmers and their families in one of their houses hiding in the cellars. Anakin and Ahsoka are then surrounded by four heavily armed bounty hunters named Sugi, Embo, Rumi Paramita, and Seripas. Obi-Wan then joins in, but then the village elder, Casiss, persuades the bounty hunters and the Jedi to stand down and listen to his village's plea for help. Casiss tells them that they paid the bounty hunters for protection against pirates who raid their village, demanding it as tribute but he also said that with the Jedi now there, the bounty hunters can fight the pirates off. Obi-Wan then said that he would like nothing better than to help the farmers, but their first priority was to find a ship and report the destruction of the medical base. Obi-Wan then explained that doing so would only attract more Separatist attention, which would be much worse than pirates. Just then, some of the pirates arrive, demanding their portion of the nysillin. Anakin and Obi-Wan are then surprised to see the opponent is none other than Hondo Ohnaka.

Hondo then acts friendly with the Jedi. When Hondo tries to buy off the bounty hunters, they refuse, stating they don't break deals. Obi-Wan says that he would pay the pirates to take them to Republic territory, but he refuses, knowing that the Jedi would pay in Republic credits, which have no value in the Outer Rim. Hondo tells the farmers to hurry up before the crops die. Obi-Wan then puts a plan together, but Dilani said they did not have enough men. Anakin then stated that the villagers would have to fight too. Then everyone started getting ready; putting up defenses, harvesting, and training. Meanwhile, Dilani was still complaining on how the farmers weren't soldiers and don't even have weapons. Anakin then showed them that their farming tools can be used as weapons. Ahsoka then teaches the farmers to use slingshots against the pirates. Seripas, while cutting down a giant fungus, was nearly crushed to death by it. Ahsoka came just in time to save him. Seripas then revealed that he is actually small and that he wore a suit to make him more intimidating. Ahsoka reassured him. Soon a pirate scout spies on the farmers while they were training. Sugi spots him and orders Embo to take care of it. He shoots the pirate's speeder, causing it to explode. Then he kills him, prompting Hondo to attack. The bounty hunters and Jedi manage to hold back the onslaught. Hondo then comes with a tank that kills Rumi and injures Embo. Anakin then attacks Hondo and manages to knock Hondo off the cliff. He begs for mercy as Anakin pulls up. Then he shouts that the effort is no longer profitable, and retreats. With the battle over, Sugi agrees to give the Jedi a ride back to the Republic.